enormous tropical forests, little known to man,
and from which he gathers here and there the treasures for
our orchid- and greenhouses ; great island conservatories like
Java and Ceylon and Borneo, rich in spices and lovely plant
life : Australian Bush, with traces of plant life as if from
	another world, but often most delicate in odour even in the
fragments of them we see in our greenhouses.

It is not only from the fragile flower-vases these sweet
odours flow; they breathe through leaf and stem, and the
whole being of many trees and bushes, from the stately
Cum trees of Australia to the sweet Verbena of Chili. Many
must have felt the charm of the strange scent of the Boxbush before Oliver Wendell Holmes told us of its ‘ breathing
the fragrance of eternity, for this is one of the odours which
carry us out of time into the abysses of the unbeginning
past.’ The scent of flowers is often cloying, as of the
Tuberose, while that of leaves is often delightful and refreshing, as in the green budding Larch, and in the leaves of Balm
and Rosemary, while in many cases fragrance is stored in the
wood and permeates down through the roots.

To but few it is given to see many of these sweet plants
in their native lands, but we who love our gardens may
enjoy many of them about us, not merely in drawings or
descriptions, but the living, breathing things themselves.
The Geraniums in the cottage window bring us the spicy
	fragrance of the South African hills ; the Lavender bush of
the sunny hills of Provence, where it is at home ; the
Roses in the garden bring near us the breath of the wild
Roses on a thousand hills ; the aromatic pot-herbs of our
gardens are a gift of the shore-lands of France and Italy and
Greece. The Sweet Bay bush in the farmer’s or cottage
garden comes with its story from the streams of Greece,
where it seeks moisture in a thirsty land along with the wild
Olive and the Arbutus. And this Sweet Bay is the Laurel
of the poets, of the first and greatest of all poet and artist
nations of the earth — the Laurel sacred to Apollo, and
used in many ways in his worship, as we may see on coins,
and in many other things that remain to us of the great
civilisations of the past . 1 The Myrtle, of less fame, was
also a sacred plant beloved for its leaves and blossoms, was,
like the Laurel, seen near the temples of the race who
built their temples as Lilies are built, whose song is deathless,
and the fragments of its art Despair to the artist of our
time. And so we see how the fragrant bushes our gardens
may entwine for us, apart from their gift of fragrance, living
	associations and beautiful thoughts for ever famous in human
story.

It is not only these trees and climbers, loved by all for
their odour, we have to think of, but many delicate ones,

1 ‘ What you call advantageous, Solon, is for these men to be
crowned in view of all the world, who just before were objects of pity
from their wounds : and yet it seems they think themselves happy if
in return for all their labours they can get a bunch of Laurel .’ — From
the Greek of Lucian.
little thought of, perhaps, from the blossoms that give it
being without showy colour, as the fragrant American wild
Vine. And among these modest flowers there are none more
delicate than the blossoms of the White Willow of Britain
and northern Europe, all the more grateful in air coming
to us. ‘ O’er the northern moorland, o’er the northern foam. ’

What is the lesson these sweet flowers have for us 1 They
tell us — if there were no other flowers to tell us — that a
	garden should be a living thing; its life not only fair in
form and lovely in colour, but in its breath and essence
coming from the Divine. They tell us that the very common attempt to conform these fair lives into tile or other
patterns, to clip or set them out as so much mere colour
of the paper-stainer or carpet-maker, is to degrade them, and
make our gardens ugly and ridiculous, from the point of
view of nature or true art. And many of these treasures for
the open garden have been shut out of our thoughts owing
to exclusion of almost everything that did not make showy
colour and lend itself to carpet or other crude modes of
setting flowers to compete with tiles and like modes of
‘ decoration.’

Of the many considerations that should occur in the
making of a beautiful garden to live in, this of fragrant
plants and flowers is one of the first. And happily among
every class of flowers which adorn our open-air gardens,
there are odorous things to be found. Apart from the
groups of plants in which all, or nearly all, are sweet, as
in Roses and Violets, the annual and biennial flowers of
	our gardens, are rich in fragrance, Stocks, Mignonette,
Sweet Peas, Sweet Sultan and Wallflowers, Double Rockets, Sweet Scabious, and many others, the odours of which are
not always so popular. These, among the most easily raised
of plants, are enjoyed by the simplest cottage gardeners.

The garden borders bear for us odours as precious as
any breath of tropic Orchid : from the Lily of the Valley
to the Carnation — this last being perhaps the most grateful
odour of all the flowering host in our garden land. Among
these borders one meets with things sweeter than words may
tell of — Woodruff, Balm, Pinks, Violets, garden Primroses,
Polyanthus, day and other Lilies, early Iris, Narcissus,
evening Primroses, Mezereon Bush, Wallflower and Pansies,
delicate in their sweetness.

No one may be richer in delicate fragrance than the wise
man who plants hardy shrubs and flowering trees — Magnolia, Thorn, Daphne, Lilac — names each telling of whole
families of delightful things. Among shrubs, those without
any very strong odour, like the hardy Heaths, are all the
more pleasant to many whose memories are often touched
	by remembered fragrance of some plant they do not always
know. From the same regions where we found the Laurel
and the Myrtle we have the Laurustinus, beautiful in all
our sea-coast and milder districts, and many other lovely
things happy in our climate : one, the Winter Sweet, even
pouring out delicious fragrance in mid-winter : Sweet Gale,
that grows in any boggy place, Azalea, Allspice, and the
delightful little Mayflower that creeps about in the woodland shades in North America. So, though we cannot boast
N of Lemon or Orange groves, our climate is kind to many
lovely and fragrant shrubs.

Even our ugly walls may be sweet gardens with Magnolia,
Honeysuckle, Clematis, Sweet Verbena, and the delightful
old Jasmine, still clothing many a house in London. Most
precious of all, however, are the noble climbing Tea Roses
raised in our own time, mostly in France within the past
forty years or so. Among the abortions of this century
these are a real gain — the loveliest flowers ever raised by
man. Noble in form and colour, and scented as delicately
as a J une morn in alpine pastures, with these most precious
	of garden roses we could cover all the ugly walls in England and Ireland, and Heaven knows there are many in want
of a veil.

The old Kent and Sussex way of having an orchard near
the house was a good one. Planted for use, it was as precious
for its beauty, and not only when the spring winds carry
the breath of its myriad blossoms of Cherry, Plum, Apple,
or Pear. We have the fruit odours too, and the faint scent
of Strawberries, and later their leaves, and the Currant leaves.

It would be, in many places, charming to plant a pretty 
orchard and have the fruit-garden near or alongside — keeping the less pleasant evidence of vegetables in the background. 
These beautiful orchards, too, are where the early Daffodils 
and Snowdrops appear. Then, with Violets and Primroses 
on the banks they may be delightfully sheltered from the 
north and east by a grove of our native evergreens — Holly 
and Yew — these, in their turn, wreathed here and there 
with the fragrant autumn Clematis, Honeysuckles, and 
Climbing Wild Roses. Of all the things for garden pictures 
there are none so good as the lovely groups of hardy trees 
forming our hardy fruits, including the Medlar and Quince, 
while near might be the Japanese and other handsome Crabs, 
which have so much beauty of bloom and also brilliant fruit 
in autumn. 

MONO the many enjoyments this fascinating 
world affords, none are more innocent or 
enticing than close association with the 
beautiful gems that so happily grace our 
gardens, where a balmy atmosphere laden 
with sweet perfumes and aromatic fragrance, rich and embowering foliage, with rural seclusion, are ever perfect ideas 
of earthly felicity — 

‘ In the calm retreat, 

Far from the busy haunts of life, 

Where Flora trains her lovely offspring up 
To captivate and charm.’ 

In all countries, civilised and savage, in the religious festivals 
of all creeds, and on all occasions whether of grief or rejoicing, the scented attractions of flowers and plants possess an 
important significance, and Nature seems to have been most 
bountiful in her munificence in scattering these odoriferous 
treasures throughout our world, to give cheerfulness to the 
earth and happiness to its inhabitants. Every rank of people 
seem equally to appreciate them as a gratification to the 
organs of sight and smell. 

The refreshing odours prevalent in a garden, where the richest 
perfumes shed their aromatic perfections lavishly around, are 
the spoils from Nature’s laboratory, that dispense delicious 
medicines to sweeten our existence. 
There are many common flowers to be found growing in 
our meadows which diffuse a gentle fragrance most gratifying 
to the senses : and, much as we are concerned with the odour 
of those flowers and shrubs which are to be met with in our 
gardens and greenhouses, the wild forms are a source of the 
keenest pleasure to all.