
Section 1.

PHYSICK FOR THE SICKNESSE.
THe word Plague in English, signifieth,A Sharpe Punishment of what kind soever. As we may reade many were the Plagues inflicted on the Egyptians: and some of us in Indignation wil threaten to plague those that highly offend us. But it is usually and most properly taken for that dreadfull affliction which in Latin is called Pestis, or Pestilentia; in Greeke in non-Latin alphabet , which signifies A Deadly Fretting, and it is the same with  in non-Latin alphabet a in non-Latin alphabet , quod efficiat Defectum Hominum. Or  in non-Latin alphabet , Pernities seu Exitium. Hippocrates gives it a name of distinction, calling it  in non-Latin alphabet , Morbus Communis, a Common or popular Disease.

But we must understand that there are two sorts of Plagues that be Epidemicall. Viz. A Simple, and a Putrid Plague.

The Simple Plague, is The very Influence of the striking Angell executing the vengeance of God upon the Bodies of Men. This kind of Plague ariseth from no distemper of Blood, putrifaction of Humors, or influence of Starres; but falleth meerely from the immediate stroke of Gods punishing Angell (Such were the Plagues, Exod. 12 Num. 11.16.25. Also, 2 Sam. 24. and 2 Kings, 19.) whereof some dye suddenly without any precedent complaint or conceit of Infection. Others againe, though they be sicke before they dye; yet their first taking hath beene after an extraordinary manner. For I observed in the last great Plague heere in London, (Anno 1625.) That some felt themselves manifestly stricken, being sensible of a blow suddainly given them, on the Head, necke, backe, or side: Sometime so violently, that they have been eyther almost, or altogether over-turned: and after these and such like stroakes some have dyed, and those that recovered, escaped without humane helpe: For this kind of Plague, as it is rare, so it is also by all Art of Man incurable. Therefore no Method but Repentance, no Medicine but Prayer, can avert, or heale this stroake: Of all Antidotes for the Body, that Triacle which is made of the Flesh of earthly Serpents, is the best esteemed: But for the Soule, that only which is made of the Bloud of that Brazen Serpent that was lifted vp on the Crosse for our sinnes. Hee that by a lively Faith applyeth the benefit of our Blessed SAVIOURS

Sufferings to the sicknesse of his Soule, shall undoubtedly recover (if not health here) heaven hereafter.

The Putrid Plague, is a Popular Feavor venemous and Infectious, striking chiefly at the Heart, and for the most part is accompanied with some Swelling, which is eyther called a Blayne, a Botch or a Carbuncle, or else with Spots called GODS Tokens. This comes of Putrifaction of the Bloud and Humors in the Body, which it pleaseth God sometimes to make the Instrument of his punishing Iustice, mixing it with the Simple Plague before mentioned.

This Putrifaction may be caused by the Influence of the Starres, who doe undoubtedly worke upon all sublunarie bodies. For Astrologers are of opinion, that if Saturne and Mars have dominion (especially under Artes, Sagitarius, and Capricorn,) a Pestilence is shortly to be expected. Or if these two (the most Malevolent) be in Opposition to the gentle Planet Iupiter; as the Poet singeth: —

Caelitús imbuitur tabe aifflatilis aura Mars quando obijcitur Falcitenens{que} Iovi.
The Windes likewise are led into theyr motions by the motions of the Starres; The Planets (especially the Sunne) by extracting the earths exhalations (which are the substance of the Winds) doe set them so on worke. And the Windes are some by nature wholsome, and some unwholsome. The South-wind blowing from the Meridian

is of nature hot and moyst, and full of showers. Now when by the influence of the Planets this Wind bloweth long and bringeth continuall raine, it causeth much moysture in all Airie and Earthy bodies, and so much the more by how much the milder it is. This moysture being in such abundance cannot be digested nor attenuated by the Sunnes heat; and therefore setling together it must needs putrifie; and that so much the sooner, because the heate of the Sunne (not being able to extract all) does inflame the remnant, by which inflamation the putrifaction becomes the greater. In this manner are the windes in cause: and moreover they doe sometimes transferre the Contagion from one region to another; as Hippocrates affirmes the Plague to be brought over the Sea from Aethiopia into Greece, by the South-wind.

Now if the Starres be pestilently bent against us, neyther Arts nor Armes, Perfumes nor Prayers, can prevaile with them, who have neyther pitie nor sense, nor power to alter their appointed motions. But Hee that commandeth their course, and altereth them at his pleasure: Hee that made the Sunne and Moone to stand still for Iosuah, yea drew the Sunne tenne degrees backe for Hezekiah, and caused the Starres to fight in their courses against Sisera. He, and He onely is able to heale all infections that can arise from their influences. The Cure of this Cause therefore is the same with the former.

Other Causes there be also of this Putrid Plague. Namely, corrupt and unwholsome Feeding, stenches of unsavorie and rotten Dung-hils, Vaults, Sinckes, Ditches and dead Carions; as the Poet affirmes; —

Corpora faeda iacent, vitiantur adoribus aurae.
These are the Maintaining Causes of the Contagion after it is begun. So is likewise the unseasonablenesse of the Weather: Quum tempestiva intempestivè redduntur: as sayth Hippocrates, When the weather is unseasonable for the season of the yeare; being hot when it should be cold, moyst when it should be dry: and on the contrary.

This kind of Plague is by Art curable in as many as it pleaseth GOD to send and sanctifie the right meanes unto.

The former is most properly called The Plague, being the immediate Stroke of Gods hand. This, The Sicknesse, because infectious, and many times Curable.

For this therefore doe I intend to prescribe a course of Physicke, such as both my much reading, and also my manifest Experience in the last great Visitation, have preferred to my best approbation.

Wherein I will first open the way of Preservation, after that, shew the Signes of being Infected, and then the Course of Cure.

In the way of Preservation, it is first necessary to be considered, whether it be Infectious or no: And then who are most or least subject (according to naturall reason) to receive this Infection.

This Putrid Plague, is (as I have sayd ihe

Definition) venemous, which is granted of all both Physitians and Philosophers. Now by Venom or Poyson, we commonly understand some thing that has in it some dangerous subtle quality that is able to corrupt the substance of a living body to the destruction or hazard of the life thereof. This working is apparent in this Sicknesse, by his secret and insensible insinuation of himself into the Vitall spirits, to which as soone as hee is gotten, he shewes himselfe a mortall enemy, offering with suddaine violence to extinguish them. His subtle entrance, his slye crueltie, his swift destroying; the unfaithfulnesse of his Crisis, and the other Prognostick signes; and the vehemencie, grievousnesse and ill behaviour of his Symptomes, all being manifest proofes of his venemous quality. For in this Disease the Seidge, Vrine, and sweat, have an abhominable savour, the breath is vile and noysome: Ill coloured Spots, Pustles, Blisters, swellings, and vlcers full of filthy matter arise in the outward parts of the Body: Such as no superfluitie or sharpnesse of Humors, nor any putrifaction of matter (without a venemous qualitie joyned with it) can possibly produce.

But though it may thus by the Learned be acknowledged to be Venemous; yet is it by many of the Ignorant sort conceited not to be Infectious.

To satisfie such, I define Infection or Contagion to be That which infecteth another with his owne qualitie by touching it, whether the medium of the touch be Corporeall or Spirituall, or an Airie Breath. Of this kind there are divers Diseases that are infectious,

though not so deadly as the Plague. As for Example, Itch and Scabbinesse, Warts, Measels, small Pox, the Veneriall Pox; these by rubbing, and corporeall touches doe infect: Also soare Eyes doe by their Spirituous beames infect other eyes: And the Pthisick or putrified Lungs doe by their corrupt breath infect the lungs of others. But the Plague infects by all these waye, and such sicke bodies infect the outward Aire, and that Aire again infects other Bodies. For there is a Seminarie Tincture full of a venemous quality, that being very thin and spirituous mixeth it selfe with the Aire, and piercing the pores of the Body, entreth with the same Aire, and mixeth it selfe with the Humors and spirits of the same Body also.

For proofe of this, we see by daily experience, that Garments, Coffers, nay walls of Chambers will a long time retaine any strong sent, wherwith they have beene fumed. Now the Sent is meerly a Qualitie, and his substance is the Aire, which is also the Vehiculum wherein it is seated and conveighed. So does the Pestilent Infection take hold, though not sensibly (for the strongest Poysons have little taste or smell) yet certainly; as experience testifies: for Garments, and Houshold-stuffe have beene infected, and have infected others. As Fracastorius tels of a Furred-Gowne, that was the death of 25. Men in Verona, Anno 1511. who one after another wore it, thinking still they had ayred it sufficiently. And if Alexander Benedictus may be beleeved, Feather-beds will keepe the Contagion seaven yeares. Other experiences we have also of live Poultry, which being applyed to the soares, are taken away dead, having not been wounded, crushed, nor hurt any whit at all. And many that have beene Infected, have plainly perceived where, and of whom they tooke it.

[Object.] But (say some) then why is not one infected as well as another I have eaten of the same dish, drunk in the same cup, and lyen in the same bed with such sicke ones, and that while their Soares were running: yet never had so much as my finger aking after it.

[Answ.] To this I answer, there may be Two speciall Causes for this. The first and Principall Cause is the Protection of the Almighty, which preserves some as miraculously as his Iustice strikes others. Thus through his Mercy he often preserves those that with faithfull and conscionable care doe Christian offices about the Sicke; being warrantably called thereto, and not thrusting themselves eyther presumptuously, or rashly into the businesse without a just, and reason-rendring Cause. For GOD has given his Angels charge over vs, to keepe vs in all our wayes, as the Psalmist sings.

And secondly, every pestilent Contagion is not of the same nature, nor hath equall conformity with every Constitution, Age, or manner of Living: For some Contagion is apt to infect onely the Sanguin complexion, some the Cholericke, some the Phlegmaticke onely: Some Children, some Youths, some those of Ripe age, some Antient people; some the Rich, and other the poore onely:

And where the Seminarie Tincture hath no Analogie, there is none, or verie flight Infection.

And first those are most apt to be Infected, that have thin Bodyes and open pores; and whose hearts are so hot, that they need much attraction of Aire to coole them.

Also, they whose Veynes and Vessels, are full of grosse humors, and corrupt juyces (the venemous matter being thicke, and therefore unapt to breath through the pores) their putrefaction is increased by the inward heat, and so driven to malignitie; and thence onward to a Pestilent qualitie. Hence those bodies that are moist and full of Phlegmaticke humors, whose veines are straight (and therefore apter to intercept then entertaine those well well concocted juyces that would make the purest Bloud) and the thicknesse of whose skin denies the transpiration of excrements: these are easily poluted and infected.

Section 2.

Repletion and Evacuation.
Exercise and Rest.
Sleepe and Watching.
Passions of the Minde.
They are composed also in these two Verses.

Aër, Esca, Quies, Repletio, Gaudia, Somnus:
Haec moderata juvant, immoderata nocent.
These indeed are the sixe Strings of Apollo ' s Viall, wherein consisteth the whole harmonie of health. If these be in tune, the body is sound: But any of those too high wrested, or too much slackned (that is immoderately used) makes a discord in nature, and puts the whole body out of tune.

For Ayre first.

Ayre is that which we draw in with our breath continually, and wee cannot live without it one minute; for it is the food of our Spirits, and therefore we had need take heed that the ayre we draw be pure and wholsome. The whole streame of Opinion runnes upon a cold and dry Aire, so commending the North and East windes, as most

wholsome: and condemning the Hot and Moist Aire engendred by the South and West windes, as the fittest matter for infection, because most apt to putrefaction. So Hippocrates (in the 2d. of his Epidem.) saith, that in Cranon a Citie of Thessalie, there arose putrid Vlcers, Pustuls, and Carbuncles, through the hot and moyst constitution of the ayre. And Galen (in 1. de Temperam. c. 4.) affirmeth, that the hot and moyst constitution of the ayre, doth most of all breed pestilent diseases. And from these mouthes, a multitude of late Writers have learnt to speake the same thing. Yet we know that the hot and dry weather also, may cause a contagious ayre. So saith Avenzoar in his 3. Booke, 3. Tract. and 1. chap. And Titus Livius (in lib. 1. decad. 4.) recordeth, that Rome was infected with the Plague by a Hot and Dry distemper of the Aire. Wee also may remember, that the Summer 1624 was an extreame dry and parching Summer: and we cannot forget that this last Summer was not much unlike like it. The Contagion indeed this yeare was begotten beyond Sea, and was rock ' d hither in sicke bodyes; but our Ayre I feare will prove a Nurse though not a Mother to it: This Spring answering to the sore-past Summer in heate and drouth.

Now to avoyde the mischiefes of unwholsome ayre; Hippocrates the Prince of Physitians,(in his Booke de Natura humana) gives this counsell. Providendum est ut quàm paucissimus aëris influxus corpus ingrediatur, & ut ille ipse quam peregrinus existat: Regionum etiam locos in quibus morbus consistat,

quantum ejus fieri potest permutare oportet.

Others advise in threee words. Citò, Longè, Tardè, which Iordanus calls an Antidote made of 3. adverbs, thus versifying upon them.

Haec tria tabificam pellunt adverbia Pestem;
Mox, Longè, Tardè; Cede, recede, redi.
But I will not teach to flee; for too many with Dedalus put on wings the last great visitation, that with Icarus dropt downe by the way. Onely my counsell is this. Let every one keepe himselfe as priuate as he may: Shun throngs of people, and all wet, close, and stinking places. Walke not abroad before, nor after Sunne. Keep moderation between heat and cold in all things; yet rather encline to heate a little, because of drying up superfluous moystures. Let the streets bee kept cleane; washing the channels every morning and evening, and sweeping away all durt, leaves, stalkes, and rootes of hearbes, and offals; leaving no dunghils nor other noysome matter in the streets. Also in the evenings it is good to purifie the ayre with Bonefires, but especially with Fireworkes: or rather with discharging of peeces: for Gunpowder is exceeding drying by reason of the Salt peeter and Sulphur with which it is made, and by the crackes that it gives, the Ayre is forcibly shaken and attenuated, and so opened to let in that purification, which is immediately made by the fire that goes along with it. This way is commended by Levinus Lemnius, de Ocultis Naturae Mirac. lib. 2. cap. 10. Also by Crato in consilio 275 By Raymundus

Mindererus lib. de Pestilentia cap. 20. and all the late Writers.

Within doores observe, that little houses must not be pestered with many Lodgers, for it is best (for those that are able) to have shift of Beds and Chambers to lie in, that the ayre in them may be kept free and sweet. Keepe every roome daily very cleane, leaving no fluts corners. Let not Water stand so long in any vessell as to putrifie; which in hot weather it will soone doe. Make Fires every day in everie roome, in quantitie according to the largenesse of the roome, and the temperature of the weather. Perfume them and all the houshold-stuffe in cold and moist weather with Frankinsense, Storax, Benjamin, Pitch, Rosin, Lignum alöes, Lignum Rhodium, Iuniper-wood, or the Berries. In hot and drie weather with Rosewater on a hot Fire-shovell, or some such like coole fume in a perfuming-pot. Strew the Windowes and ledges with Rew, Wormwood, Lavender, Marjoram, Penyriall, Costmary, and such like in cold weather; but in hot with Primroses, Violets, Roseleaves, Borrage, and such cooling scents.

For Garments, avoide (as much as may bee) all leather, woollen, and furres: also velvets, plush, and shagge. Choose such as may be watered, as chamlets, grograms, paropas, philip and chenyes, and such like: for their gumminesse excludeth the infectious aire best. Have shift, and shift often; and still as cloathes are left off, perfume them well.

Beware of buying old clothes, Bedding or such like stuffe: for if they have beene used by

the infected, they are verie dangerous, as I told you before in the authoritie of a furr ' d Gowne, and Feather-beds.

Carrie in your mouth a peece of Citron-pill, or for want of that, of Lemon pill; a Clove, or a peece of Tormentill Root. Or if any will resort to me in Golding lane, I will soone provide for them Lozenges to hold in their mouth, sit for their constitution, and such as I have had good experience of, the last great Plague time.

Carry in your hand a Lemon stucke with cloves, sweet Marjoram, Lavender, Balme, Rew, or Wormwood; as the constitution of your braine shall require. For beleeve by my experience, that many did enflame their braines, and so fell into the Sicknesse they shunned in the last great Contragion, by smelling to, and carrying things in their mouthes too hot for their complexion.Camphor also, though it be accounted an excellent coole fume for ill aires, yet those that have cold and weake stomacks are very much weakned by the use of it.

But beware of unsavourie smels and stinking odours. For though Dioscorides commends Galbanum, and Cardan the burning of Leather, Averroes a potion of Vrine, and others the smelling to Horse-dung: yet I stand to it, that sweet and pleasing odours are more proper; because they dilate, restore and comfort the Spirits; whereas the contrary doe contract, and repugne them; and so weaken the faculties. I intend to have also preservative waters to dip Spunges in for severall

Constitutions, to be carried in Boxes to smell to: As also, preservative Pomanders of choyse vertue.

The next point of Dyet, is Meat and Drinke. Let your meate be alwayes good and sweet, temperate betwixt hot and cold, and not too moyst or fleshie: easie of digestion, and such as makes the best Bloud.

Such are Beefe, Mutton, Lambe, Kid, and Cony. Turkey, Capon, Pullet, Partridge, Pheasant, Pigeons, Turtles, Larkes, Black-birds, Thrushes, and Finches. All Water-fowles are naught. The Hearts of Red and Fallow Deere, are speciall good: so also are those of young Steeres, Calves, Kids, and Lambes: beeing cordiall, both by reason of Sympathy, and solidnesse of the flesh, which causeth them to be the lesse corruptible.

Of Fish, (which should be eaten but seldome, though it be of the best kinde) the elected are fresh Salmon, Trout, Barbell, Shrimps, Playse and Flounders, (when they are firme, not flashy) Smelts, Makarell, Gudgion, Mullet, Soale, Gurnard, Lobster, and Cray-fish. But Eeles, Lamperns, and Lampreys, with all such as delight in Mud, are to bee avoyded.

Egges of Hennes and Turkeys, are good.

Oyle and Butter, are kindes of Antidotes against venome; and Butter-milke may now and then be used by hot Constitutions.

Fruites must be eaten but sparingly.

Those that wee may be most bold withall, are sowre Cherries; Plums, and Gooseberries before they be full ripe, having a sowre taste. Also Peaches, Quinces, Pomgranads, Oranges, Limons, Medlars, Services, Mulberries, Raspes, Strawberries, and Currans, which being not full ripe are astringent, but ripe doe loosen the body. But of Walnuts, Filbers, and Small-nuts, the elder are the better Dryed Fruits also are good, whether they bee Peares, Plums, Cherries, Figs, Raisons, or Prunes. Moreover, Pease, Beanes, and Artichokes, may be used sometimes by leane and spare Bodies. If other Fruits that are colder and moyster bee longed for; eate after the man Orange with a little fennell and salt.

The best Rootes are Onions, Leekes, and Radishes, for these are vertuous against venome. But they offend hot heads, and weake eyes.

Of Herbes;Rue, Wormwood, Balme, Mints, Pennyryall, Rosemary, Sage, sweet Marjorum, and Time. For Sallets and Sauces, Burrage, Buglosse, Violets, Fennell, and especially Sorrell; Olives also, and Capers.

Vineger, Verjuice, juice of Limons and Oranges; which for their drynesse resist putrifaction, and for their coolnesse, Feavors. But those colder stomackes that are offended with them, may temper them with Wine and Spices. Yet there must be cautious usage of hot spices, and all salt meates, lest they inflame the Bloud; though in regard of their drying and heating quality they be usefull in some bodies, and at some times; especially for cold and waterish stomackes: Others must mixe them with Vineger, Verjuice, or the juice of Limons or Oranges.


Note here, That Vineger is of a speciall vertue against putrifaction, as AMBROSE PAREY in the 8. Chapter of his Booke of the Plague proveth, by the use of it in washing dead bodies with it before they are Embalmed, that they may keepe sweet the longer. But it is not so good for Women, because it offends the Mother (as CRATO affirmeth, Consil. 275.) therefore they must allay it with white Wine and Sugar.

Note also, that Cabbages, Coleworts, Lettuce,Pompions, Musk-Mellons, and Coucumbers, are very dangerous meates in contagious times; neither doe I approve of any other rootes, then Garlicke, for rusticke bodies; and for others Onions, Leekes, and Radishes (as I said before) onely.

Roasting is the best way of dressing Flesh, and Frying or Broyling of Fish.

Broths are but for Sicke and weake ones fit: And then they must be sharpned with a little Vineger, or juice of Lemmons. For (as MANARDUS sayes, lib. 5. Epist. 3.) the body ought rather to be dried then moystened.

And so then for Drinke, it must be as little as may well be borne; good and pure, whether it be Beere, Ale, or Wine, (for Mede, Vsquba{que}, Bragget, &c. I account them rather Medicines then parts of Food) But neither heady, too sweet, nor too small. To a weake stomacke and a feeble Nature, Wine is an Antidote against all Poysons; as CELSUS lib. 8. de Re Medica cap. 27. affirmeth. And Senectutis summa est medicina, as ATTIUS teaches, Tetr. 1. serm. 4. cap. 30. But let not those that

are young and strong, make a common use of them in Contagious times: For it must needs breed Inflamation, after which followes Putrifaction, which is a fit host to entertaine such an ill guest as the Pestilence.

Wheaten-Bread of a Day old, and a little leavened is absolutely the best for healthy people. Light Biskets also with Anise-seeds is very good.

For the strict Quantitie of Eating and Drinking, I cannot stint every mans stomacke; but must conclude with HIPPOCRATES, Aph. 17. lib. 1. Concedendum est aliquid Tempori, Regioni, Aetati, & Consuetudini. The Season, Place and Custome, must beare some sway in these things. Only beware of Sacietie or Glutting: For the same Hippocrates in his 17th. Aphorisme, in the 2, Booke. Sayes, that Meate and Drinke immoderately taken, causeth Sicknesse. For from thence arise Crudities, which (sayth GALEN, in Comm. 2. in Hippocr. de Natur. Humana) breed new Diseases. Therefore hearken to AVICEN, Who adviseth alwayes to rise from Meate with some remainder of appetite: for within halfe an houre, or thereabouts, as soone as the meate first eaten beginneth to digest, our hunger ceaseth. lib. 1. Fen. 3. Doct. 2. cap 7. And hence it is, that some (greedily following the sense of their appetite-onely) over-charge their stomackes even to vomiting, before they feele themselves satisfied: because though the vessell be over-full, yet appetite is not apprased till Concoction have begun her worke upon some part of that which is already received.


Section 3.


Lazinesse encreaseth superfluous humours, and over-violent labour, wasteth away the nourishing ones. But moderate exercise(ad ruborem non ad sudorem) stirreth up and nourisheth Naturall heate, helping Concoction and Evacuation; if also it be used in seasonable times and convenient places. The best Exercise is walking with a little stirring

of the armes. The Time, in the morning: and the place, eyther in a pure ayre abroad, or in a purified ayre at home, in some large roome, where is little or no company, by the heate of their bodies and breaths, to distemper the Aire. But at all times beware of taking cold; for great colds and rheumes doe easily putrid Feavors, and they as easily prove Pestilent.

Sleepe and Watching is the fifth point.
Sleepe eyther immoderate or unseasonable, hindereth digestion, and causes crudities, quels the vitall and dulls the Animall Spirits. Watching also over-much, dries up and inflames the good Bloud, and weakens all the powers of Nature.

Let your sleepe therefore be seasonable, and not superfluous. Not upon your dinner, unlesse custome commands it; and then take it but vapping for halfe an houre or so, sitting in a Chaire upright.

Three houres at least after a light Supper goe to Bed; where let five or sixe houres suffice for sleepe. Lye conveniently warme, the Chamber dores and windowes being shut to exclude the night ayre. But beware of sleeping or lying on the ground or grasse: for the nearer the earth the more deadly is the Aire. And the immediate stroake of the cold vapors rising from the ground is dangerous at all times.

The Sixt Point of Diet, is Passions of the Mind.
All kindes of Passion, if they be vehement, doe

offer violence to the Spirits; yea though they be of the better and more naturall sort.

As Laughter (if unbridled) doth runne even life out of breath, and greatly perplexeth the Body: in so much as the brest and sides are pained, the breath is straitned, and sometimes the Soule it selfe, is (as I may say) laughed out of her skin.

For so it is recorded of CHRYSIPPVS, That onely upon the sight of an Asse eating Figges, he brake into such an unmeasurable laughter, that he fell downe and dyed.

Section 4.

There is commonly,

1 Trembling of the heart, fainting or sowning.
2 A Feavor, though not easily discerned at first.
3 Cardialgia, commonly called Heart-ache.
4 Vomiting, and Loathing in the stomacke.
5 Extreame Thirst, and vile taste in the Mouth.
6 Head-ache, and pricking paines there.
7 Swimming, or Vertigo.
8 Losse of Memorie, and Foolish behaviour.
9 Want of sleepe.
10 Delirium, or Frenzy.
11 Convulsions, or Cramps.
12 Lethargie, or extreame Drowsinesse.
13 Sharp paines in the Eares.
14 Opthalmia, or inflamation of the Eyes.
15 Bleeding at the Nose.
16 The tongue and mouth enflam ' d and furr ' d.
17 Spitting of Bloud.
18 Squinansie.
19 Pleuresie.
20 Very short Breath, and continuall sighing.
21 Drye Cough.
22 Iaundise.
23 Swelling of the Belly with externall paine.
24 Colick, and Iliak Passions.
25 Extreame Costinesse.
26 Wormes.
27 Flux of the Belly: eyther Lieuteria, or Diarrhaea.
28 Bloudy Flux.

29 Swelling of the Testicles very painefully.
30 Suppression of Vrine.
31 Extreame heate, and paine in the Backe.
32 Swelling of the Feet and Legges with intollerable paine.
33 And sometimes, Such immoderate Sweat horribly stinking, that it affrights the Physitian from his course of sweating the Patient, and yet for all this sweat the deadly danger increaseth.
And not one of these Symptomes can bee cured by the common Method of such cases: Because of the venemous quality that is mixed with them.

When I had well informed my selfe of these things, and saw how little they were regarded of others. I was stricken with wonder to see, with what peaceable consciences some men went a killing. And I began to doubt whether it were not better for a man to be at peace with Ignorance, then to carry his trembling heart in his hand, as I did al that time. Yet then it pleased God to blesse my labours and counsailes, and to let a very small number faile under my advice.
