


Religion is the greatest enemy to religion, the false to the true, favos etiam vespae faciunt, Waspes also make combes, though instead of honey we find gun-powder. 
 
XC. 
The grub or worme in it ' s first state or life is a rude creature, not much delighting in it selfe, lesse delighting others, but when it is shut up to be transmuted, then it is for a time a formelesse lump, without any beauty or comelinesse: but waite a few dayes and the parts will appeare, life will move in these yet imperfect members which are at length perfectly formed, and then it comes forth an agill usefull creature. And as God doth not make the whole fabrick of the world at once, though it wa• not impossible to him being a God almighty, but in the space of six dayes, so doth God deale with his children: when God creates in his children a new heart, he suffers first their hearts to be as a rude and massie lumpe, full of darknesse, and then sends his holy Spirit into their hearts, which illuminates them, and drives away those black clouds of darknesse and ignorance, and then he breathes into them the sweete ayre of his Spirit; And thus out of Tohu and B•hu is the new creature formed. 
 
XCI. 
We should doe as the Bee when she hath sucked sweetnesse 
 
from the flower, she better concocts and refires it in her owne bodie, and so it becomes pure honey. Thus when we have sucked any precious truth, we should by holy meditation concoct it in our hearts, and then it would become pure profitable honey. 
 
XCII. 
The young Bees as soone as they have past their second birth, and transmuted their shape and qualities, and are winged and strengthened to flie abroad, presently fall to their worke, and imitate the elder Bees. And so doth the beleeving soule, as soone as it is borne againe, strengthened and winged with grace from God, makes after him in workes of obedience, holinesse and praises, imitates the examples of the Prophets and Apostles, as they have followed Christ. Let disadvantages be what will be, you cannot keepe young Bees in the hive when once transmuted and winged, no more can you keepe the regenerate soule from working the workes of God, and with holy praises ascending to heaven, when they are once under the line of Christs everlasting love and feele it shine mighty hot in them with full face, with perpendicular rayes, but with a present rapture make holinesse their worke and Hallelujahs all their language. 
 
XCIII. 
Honey is gathered with much art from great variety of trees and flowers; and joy is a honey, a fragrancy made from above with much picking, choosing, and composing. 
 
XCIV. 
Bees are neate sweete and cleanly creatures, naturally abhorring stinking places and strong senting herbes. It is true they gather of the flowers of some weeds which are bitter and offensive, but yet the flowers are not (as Broome, Henbane, Mayweed) as your tast and  smell  may informe you. But where the flowers participate of the ill sent of the herbes they meddle not at all (as Gallopsia, Cheesrunnet). And Christ puts •io 
 
toades in his bosome (saith one) nor beleevers wicked men into the intimacy of their affections, puritie will bosome puritie, corruption cannot delight in uncorruption, Heterogeneals will not incorporate, light and darknesse are inconsistent, gracious and ungodly men cannot live and linke together. A good heart cannot with more pleasure rest it selfe then in Gods resting place, in Christs societie, in the way of the Spirit, in the Ministery of Angels, and fellowship of the Saints.
