 
These unspeakable benefits which ye have conceived by the Word, ye are now to receive by the Sacrament, if ye come prepared thereunto: for they who come prepared to participate of these holy mysteries, receive with them and by them, though not in them, the body and bloud of our Lord and Saviour, and thereby shall I say they become flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone? nay rather he becommeth flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone. The spirit which raised him quickneth them, and preserveth in them the life of grace, and them to the life of glory. Howbeit, as the sweetest meats turne intop choler in a distempered stomach, so this heavenly Manna, this food of Angels, nay this food which Angels never tasted, proves no better than poyson to them, whose hearts are not purified by faith, nor their consciences purged by true repentance and charity from uncleannesse, worldlinesse, envie, malice, ranckour, and the like corrupt affections. If a Noble man came to visit us, how would we cleanse and perfume our houses? what care would we take to have all the roomes swept, hung and dressed up in the best manner? Beloved Christians, we are even now to receive and entertaine the Prince of Heaven, and the Son of God; let us therefore cleanse the inward roomes of our soules by examination of our whole life, wash them with the water of our penitent teares, dresse them up with divine graces, which are the sweetest flowers of Paradise, perfume them with most fragrant spices and aromaticall odours, which are our servent prayers, zealous meditations, and elevated affectious, tuned to that high straine of the sweet Singer of Israel, Lift ye up, ye gates, and be yeqlift up, ye everlasting doores, and the King of glory shall come in. Cui, &c. 
 
THE REWARD OF PATIENCE. THE LII. SERMON. 
 
PHILIP. 2.9. 
Wherefore God hath also highly exalted him. 
 
Right Honourable, &c. 
 
THe drift of the blessed Apostle in the former part of this chapter, to which my Text cohereth, is to quench the fire-bals of contention cast among the Philippians by proud and ambitious spirits, who preached the Gospel of truth not in truth and sincerity, but in faction, and through emulation: (Phil. 1.15.) Some indeed preach Christ out of envie and strife. This fire kindled more and more by the breath of contradiction, and nourished by the ambition of the teachers, and factious partaking of the hearers, Saint Paul seeketh to lave out, partly with his owne teares, partly with Christs bloud, both which he mingleth in a passionate exhortation at the entrance of this chapter: If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels of mercies; fulfill yee my joy, bee yee like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vaine glory. Look not every man to his owne things, but every man also to the things of others. Let the same mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who being in the forme of God, thought it no robbery to be equall with God: But made himselfe of no reputation, &c. In this context all other parts are curiously woven one in the other, only there is a bracke at the fifth verse, which seemes to have no connexion at all with the former: for the former were part of a zealous admonition to brotherly love and christian 
reconciliation, add this to voluntary obedience and humiliation: in those he perswaded them to goe together as friends, in this to give place one to the other: in those he earnestly beseecheth them to be of one mind among themselves, in this to be of the same mind with Christ Jesus. Now peace and obedience, love and humility seeme to have no great affinity one with the other; for though their natures be not adverse, yet they are very divers. Howbeit, if ye look neerer to the texture of this sacred discourse, ye shall find it all closely wrought, and that this exhortation to humility, to which my Text belongeth, hath good coherence with the former, and is pertinent to the maine scope of the Apostle; which was to re-unite the severed affections, and reconcile the different opinions of the faithfull among the Philippians, that they might all both agree in the love of the same truth, and seeke that truth in love. This his holy desire he could not effect, nor bring about his godly purpose, before he had beat down the partition wall that was betwixt them: which because it was erected by pride, could be no otherwise demolished than by humility. The contentions among the people grew from emulation among the Pastors, and that from vaine glory. As sparkes are kindled by ascending of the smoake, so all quarrels and contentions by ambitious spirits: theadivisions of Reuben are haughty thoughts of heart. A high conceit of their owne, and a low value and under rate of the gifts of others, usually keep men from yeelding one to the other upon good termes of Christian charity. Wherefore the Apostle, like a wise Physician, applyeth his spirituall remedy not so much parti laesae, to the part where the malady brake forth, as to the cause, the vanitie of the Preachers, and pride of the hearers, after this manner: 
 
Christ humbled himselfe, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Crosse: therefore they who desire to be affected and liked of him, must be like affected to him, and not exalt themselves above others in pride, but rather abase themselves below them in humility; not behave themselves as lords over the faith of others, but rather demeane themselves as servants for Christs sake; not pursue ambitiously the glory of this world, but account it the greatest glory to partake with Christ in the infamy of the Crosse. How unfit and incongruous a thing is it in contention to preach the Gospel of peace? in rage and choler to treat of meeknesse? in malice and hatred to exhort to Christian love and reconciliation? in pride to commend humility? in vaine glory to erect the Crosse of Christ? that is to deny the power of it in so declaring it. Yet if they will needs bee ambitious, if their affections are so set upon glory and honour that nothing can take them off, let them take the readiest course to compasse their desire, which lyeth not in the higher way they have chosen, by advancing themselves, but in the lower way, which Christ took by abasing himselfe. 
For glory is of the nature of a Crocodile, which flyeth from them that pursue it, and pursueth them that flie it, as S.bChrysostome excellently declareth it: Glory (saith he) cannot be attained but by eschuing it; if thou makest after it, it maketh away from thee; if thou flyest from it, it followeth thee; if thou desirest to be glorious, be not ambitious; for all truly honour them who affect not honour: as on the contrary they hold a base opinion of such as are ever aspiring to honour, and that for the most part without desert. 
Two weighty reasons wee have in this verse to incline all Christian minds to obedient humility or humble obedience, a patterne of it and the reward thereof: he humbled himself so low, therefore God exalted him so high. Of the patterne most lively drawne in the life and especially the death of our Saviour, I have said something already, and shall more hereafter; yet can never say all. As Socrates spake of Philosophy, that it was nothing but meditatio mortis, a meditation upon death, we may of Divinity, that it is in a manner nothing else but meditatio mortis Christi, a meditation on Christs death: for the learnedest of all the Apostles would be knowne of no other knowledge that he had, or much esteemed but this, Icdesire (saith he) to know nothing but Jesus Christ, and him crucified.dPliny describeth unto us a strange kind of people in Africa, that had no mouthes, but received all their nourishment at their nostrils (which is nothing else but sweet  smells  and fragrant odours) who if they are to take any long journey, provide themselves of great store of flowers, and sweet wood, and aromaticall spices, lest they starve by the way. I will not warrant the narration, because I know it is a case over-ruled in Aristotles philosophy, that  smells  nourish not; but the application I can make good out of the Apostle, who calleth the Gospel and the Preachers thereof odorem vitae ad vitam, a savour ofelife unto life. Though the naturall life be not, yet the spirituall is nourished by odours & savours. And howsoever we are not in our bodies, yet in our soules we are Astomi, and, like those people of Africa, receive nourishment from sweet trees and roots. The sweet root we are alwayes to carry about us, is the root of the flower of Jesse: the savoury wood we are to  smell  unto, is the wood of the Crosse, that is, the tree of life in the midst of our Paradise. It is the ladder of Jacob whereby we ascend into heaven, it is the rod of Aaron that continually buddeth in the Church, it is the Juniper tree whose shade killeth the Serpent, it is the tree which was cast into the waters of Marah and made them sweet: no water so bitter, no affliction so brackish, to which the Crosse of Christ giveth not a sweet rellish.
