At the time of my examination, it had become full, and the liquid portion of its contents fermenting, from the heat of the weather, was overflowing the wooden covering of the cesspool, and running into the neighbouring gardens. The stench was so great, that several of the inmates of the houses applied personally to me to get it abated. The cesspool has been since emptied, and the evil suspended for a time; proper drainage would be the only really efficient remedy. Sickness and Mortality. Forty-four deaths were registered during the month of May. Nine inquests were held; two on persons who died suddenly, from disease, one on an elderly woman, 81, who expired from the effect of accidental burning, and six on persons drowned, by committing suicide or otherwise. The oldest person registered, was a male, aged 91, two females attained each the age of 82. The parish continues healthy, andfreerfrom epidemicdisease than it was, perhaps, ever known before. One death from typhoid fever occurred in a child, five years old, but not one took place either from measles, smallpox, scarlet-fever, or hooping-cough. Yours respectfully, Jane, 1857. W. MURDOCH. EIGHTEENTH RE PORT. Gentlemen, Complaints are being continually made by the inhabitants of Rotlierhithe-street, from the southern extremity of Swan-lane to the \"Horns,\" of the foul smells which they have been obliged to endure for some time past. Nor are these complaints without foundation; for in the above mentioned length of Street, about a mile, there are, besides the Surrey Consumer's Gas Works, no less than nine factories for the fabrication of patent manure, that is to say, nine sources of fetid gases. When these factories are in full activity, as they are from the month of December to July, the stores of stinking ingredients used by the manufacturers, 9 give a permanent smell to some parts of the street, and when the mixing goes on, the action of the sulphuric acid upon the animal and vegetable matter gives out a stench, which has occasioned headache, nausea, vomiting and cough to some of the inmates of the houses adjacent to the factories. I have made many visits to these places during the past month, and hvae found no reason to alter the opinion, which I have always hitherto expressed to this Board, in many of my previous reports; i.e., that the making of patent manure in open troughs is always a nuisance, and ought not to be allowed in a crowded neighbourhood. The only remedy then for the present state of things, appears to be the following; either to take legal proceedings against each manufacturer, individually, for the suppression of the nuisance, or to force hiin to conduct his operations in closed vessels, and to carry the gases evolved in mixing, through a fire and up a shaft, that they may be thoroughly decomposed before escaping into the atmosphere. I should mention that some of the patent manure manufacturers make sulphuric acid on the premises. The only case of imperfect drainage mentioned in the Agenda Paper, which requires particular notice, is that of the houses 3 and 4, Goldsworthy-terrace. These two houses have a cesspool in common. At No. 4, there is pan and water supply, at No. 3, a privy without either. Now, it so happens, that the cesspool has no outlet, and fills with the water let off at No. 4, and No. 3 lying rather lower than No. 4, the yard of the former is often inundated. The remedy is obvious, to connect the cesspool with the nearest drain. The Dodds-place ditch is in a filthy state ; when cast during the last month, the effluvium arising from it caused great annoyance to the neighbourhood. Much benefit would accrue, were this ditch oftener flushed with water than it has been of late. The Railway arches have again been objects of my attention. On the 30th June about one o'clock p.m., the unpleasant smell of the vapour of linseed oil extended for a considerable distance round the arches occupied by Messrs. Pullinger and Rattenbury. On application for admission to the premises, it was refused to the Inspector and myself. Admission was also refused at the arch 501. I have every reason to believe that the arch 501 is either a factory for patent manure, or a warehouse for its ingredients. An overpowering stench was perceived in and about the Tunnel-square, on the morning of Wednesday, the 24th June. It seemed to come from the north-east, and was referred by many to the Gas Works. I therefore made it my business to visit those works repeatedly, and to spend some hours on the 10 promises; I must premise by stating, that no means has yet been discovered of carrying on the process of gas-making without offensive odours. In some respects, great improvements have taken place. Sulphate of iron, mixed with saw-dust, has been substituted as a purifier, instead of milk of lime, which was formerly a source of greatgrievance to the neighbouring dwellinghouses; when it was emptied from the purifying vessels into an open pit in the yard, emitting, at the time of its discharge, aud afterwards, large quantities of hydrosulphurous gas. I caused a purifier, containing dry lime, and another, containing the sulphate of iron to be stirred up in my presence; I perceived nothing more than the ordinary smell of gas, and that not so strongly as I expected. 1 mentioned in my first Report, that sulphate of ammonia is fabricated on the premises, and described the process. A new branch of industry has sprung up since that Report was written, namely, the making of the muriate, or rather hydrochlorate of ammonia. This salt is produced by causing the gas, immediately after the first process of washing and still containing much ammonia, to pass through a solution of chloride of manganese, in a closed vessel. Decomposition takes place, hydrochlorate of ammonia is formed, and the oxyde of manganese precipitated. The mother liquor, containing the muriate of ammonia in solution, is then drawn off and allowed to settle. It is afterwards brought up in large shallow troughs, lined with lead and heated by pipes, through which hot steam is continually passing, the muriate of ammonia becoming deposited as the water disappears. The vessel containing the solution of muriate of ammonia was emptied out in my presence. A slight effluvium of sulphurous gases was given off, but it did not last long nor extend itself beyond the building. A fault was originally committed by the Parish of Rotherhithe, in allowing a Gas Company to establish its works so near the dwellings; but now that these works are established, I think it a part of my duty to visit them occasionally and report thereon to this Vestry. I have the pleasing assertion to make, that in no month since I have addressed reports to this Board, has the mortality been so small as in June, 1857; only twenty-four deaths having been registered in Rotherhithe, ten less than in the corresponding month of last year, and thirteen under the usual monthly average. The parish continues quite free from epidemic disease, nor has a single death therefrom been registered during the just elapsed months. A few cases of mild diarrhoea have occurred, but no fatal one has been recorded. 11 Rotherhithe at this moment (30th June, 1857), is remarkably healthy. Daring the three months, ending June 30th, two hundred and two children were born, ninety-nine males and one hundred and three females; and one hundred and four deaths, from all causes, were registered, fifty-nine males and forty-five females, giving a majority of ninety-eight more births than deaths. Yours respectfully, July, 1857. W. MURDOCH. NINETEENTH REPORT. Gentlemen, Among the various blocks of houses with which the inhabited part of Rotherhithe is covered, it would be difficult to find, on an equal space of ground, a fouler collection of cesspools than those visited by the Inspector and myself in Swan-lane, Norfolkplace, York-street, York-place, and the west side of Clarencestreet, the numbers of the dwellings being given in the Agenda Paper. Almost every cesspool was full, and at Nos. 21 and 22, York-street, the 3rards were covered with overflowing filth. I tasted the water from the butt at No. 21; it was strongly impregnated with the flavour of drainage. Not a proper ashpit was to be seen at any of these places, the dust and refuse being either scattered over the yard, or thrown into a corner. The superficial drainage appeared to have been originally tolerably good, but at many houses it was choked up. There was water supply everywhere, but the receptacles for the water were generally too small, and often unclean ; scarcely a butt had a cover, and the contents were, consequently, exposed to receive all sorts of impurities frbm the atmosphere. I felt during this examination, that notwithstanding all the past exertions of this Board and its Officers, the task of improving the habitations of the poor, of introducing therein order and cleanliness, and of humanizing their habits of life, is still in its infancy; but, as I have often said before, I consider this humanization of the habits of the people as necessary a part of education as the culture of the understanding. The house, No. 352, Rotherliithe-wall, is tenanted by a greengrocer ; it was formerly a warehouse or factory. In the upper and front part of the warehouse, sleeping-rooms have been built; the back part remains much the same as it was originally, and is used as a stable. The from part of the basement floor, under the sleeping-rooms, is a shop with a small, dark room partitioned off, so that the stable and the dwelling-house 12 are under one roof. Two horses are kept in the stable, in a corner of which the dung is thrown, and with it all the refuse matter from the greenshop. During the hot weather, this heap exhaled a smell most offensive to the inmates of the neighbouring houses. I entered one of them; the stench in the sitting room was worse than that of a privy. I suggested that the dungheap be immediately removed, and the place washed with chloride of lime, which was done. I must leave to the Vestry, to deal with this matter as they think fit; but, if the stable be allowed at all, the dung ought to be carted away, and the place purified daily with chloride of lime or zinc. I feel it my duty to make one remark before leaving the subject. I asked the occupier about the health of his family; he told me at once that only those children that came to the place with him were still alive. Every child born in this locality (three in number) had died in early infancy; for the very simple reason that adults and large children could escape occasionally from such an atmosphere, while the poor infants, from the moment of their birth, inhaled the fatal exhalations of decomposing animal and vegetable matter. The mortality of young children may always be considered as one of the best indexes of the sanitary condition of any population. At the request of the Vestry Clerk, 1 examined, on the 25th of July, the three tenements— Nos. 15, 10, and 17, Rotherhithe New-road, near the Railway arches. A large cesspool has been dug in the garden of the middle house, (No. 16), to receive the drainage of all three, and covered with boards and earth. Having become full and the contents fermenting, from the heat of the sun, the garden of No. 16 was covered with sewage, and offered to the eye a frightful mass of putrescence. The inhalation of the pestilential vapours arising from such a nuisance had, at the time of my visit, already begun its work. Three children at No. 16 had been affected with severe diarrhoea. A notice was immediately served. The stench from two street gullies in Clarence-street, has been much complained of, I beg to submit the propriety of trapping them, to the favourable consideration of the Board. The putrid smell of the Thames water has been noted in several of the public papers, and among others, in the weekly reports of the Registrar-general, and has undoubtedly, been remarked by many of the gentlemen here present. 1 must again mention that the large population of Hanover-street, have no water supply except from a tidal rcell, and unless they content themselves with stinking Thames water, must beg or steal all they.consume. On the '27th July, I examined some of the water 13 from the well, it smelt as if it had been recently dipped from a sewer. The whole water supply of Western Rotherhithe has, during the past month, been often scanty and deficient. The high cisterns frequently receiving no water for several days together. It appears to me that more pressure is required at the central works, that the mains in this Parish are generally rather too small, and that much water is wasted by the carelessness of the inhabitants themselves. Let me add, however, in justice to the Southwark and Vauxhall Company, that their water is of good quality. In the eastern or lower district which receives its mains from the Kent Water Works, the water is also of good quality, and no complaints are ever heard about the supply being defective. Under the Railway arches, the nuisances seem somewhat abated. The only stench perceived by me on the 27th July, was a strong odour of sugar scum issuing from some of the arches. Complaints have been often made of the smell of the mud of the mill-stream between Mill-pond Bridge and the Surrey Mills. Into this portion of the stream is discharged the drainage of about thirty-three bouses; namely, of all the east side of West Lane, of West-place, of Iphigenia Cottages, of three houses in Paradise-street, and of all the west side of Gillam's-court, except one house. The mud is, in consequence, a mass of fermenting sewage, The house, No. 26, Gillam's-court, is the only one properly drained, the closet has a pan and water supply, and appended to it an excellent ashpit. It might be taken as a model of the manner in which small dwellings should be fitted up with regard to these matters. The prevalent disease during July was, and still continues to be, diarrhcea, the Parish being perfectly free from all other epidemics. Nine persons have succumbed to that complaint, one being registered as dying from choleraic diarrhoea, and one from cholera infantum, so that above one-fourth of the whole mortality of the month has been occasioned by diarrhcea; the number of deaths registered being thirty-five, still under the average monthly death rate, and ten less than in the corresponding month of the year 1856. The month of July having in that year been in Rotherhithe one of the most unhealthy. Yours respectfully, August, 1857. W. MURDOCH. 14 TWENTIETH REPORT. Gentlemen, If a person who had been absent from Rotherliithe for the last few years was at present to visit it, he could not fail to be struck with the improvements which have taken place in its general aspect by the filling up of some of the many ditches and open sewers which formerly intersected it in every direction. There is no doubt that to this and other measures of sanitary reform are mainly attributable, the amended health of the place, the almost entire absence of fever, and the diminished severity of epidemic disease, a statement which is proved by the concurrent testimony of the medical practitioners, and by the weekly returns of the Registrar-general. Rotherliithe, however, still contains three of the foulest ditches in the whole neighbourhood of London— namely, the Earle Sewer, the Surrey Mills, and the King's Mills tidal streams. Of the two former, I have spoken in my previous reports; my business on this occasion is with the King's Mills stream only. This watercourse, as marked on the maps, is about three miles in length, but as some of its numerous windings have been filled up or become dry, a mile and a half may be about its present extent. It has not been cleansed for these ten years, and the mud in all parts of it is several feet in thickness. The tide not being now let in from the river either so often or so abundantly as formerly, the water in the remote ramifications of the stream scarcely covers the mud, is hardly ever properly renewed, stagnates, and putrifies. The worst portion, however, is from the outlet into the Thames to the first divisiou into two main branches, a distance of about six hundred feet. The western embankment at this spot, is formed by the premises of the Surrey Consumers' Gas Company, and their refuse water and tar find their way into the bed of the watercourse. The family of Mr. Latreille, whose house is situated near the outlet into the Thames, have much suffered in health from the stenches generated when the pond is emptied. I consider the King's Mills Stream a nuisance of the worst kind, and as many complaints have been made to me about it, I thought it advisable to bring it at once under the notice of this Vestry. In Wellington-street, Albion-street, there is, after rain, a pool of stagnant water, from which, during the hot weather, a disagreeable stench arises. No. 23, Queen-street is an overcrowded house, its six rooms . being occupied by five families, in all twenty-two people. For all these there was a small water-butt, holding about fifty gallons ; and every other thing conducing to comfort or convenience, cleanliness or health, shamefully deficient. 15 The numerous houses mentioned in the Agenda Paper have been visited by the Inspector and myself, and notices served. Two of them, however, deserve special remark, namely, Nos. 4 and 5, Queen-street. The drainage of these two dwellings runs from the back to the front, through an open wooden trough under the floor of the lower rooms, and discharges itself by a sort of pigeon-hole in the wall into the street; the neighbours and passengers complain of the stench generated by the drainage stagnating on the pavement and in the gutter. I beg earnestly again to direct the attention of the Inspecting Committee of the Western District to a row of eight tworoomed tenements, called Adam's-place. These tenements are quite unventilated, there being no openings in any of them, except a window and a door on the groundfloor and a window on the first floor, all in front of each house. Before each house is a yard, about twelve or thirteen feet long and ten broad; and at its extremity, furthest removed from the dwelling, a privy. As almost every yard is inundated from the overflowing of the cesspool, and in one or two cases, the filth is literally penetrating into the ground floor of the houses, every breath inhaled by the inmates must be charged with the effluvia arising from the liquid pollution. The houses have no water supply whatever. This row is a disgrace to the owners whoever they may be; for, notwithstanding many warnings, they have heartlessly left a mass of putrefaction to bake for months in the sun of this tropical summer, at the risk of the health of the inhabitants, who are composed of the poorest class; and who, in their utter helplessness to better, by any effort of their own, the condition of their dwellings, are continually making appeals to your officers. At the back of the houses, 380, 381, and 382, Rotherhithewall, there is a piece of ground measuring fifty feet north and south, by about thirty-nine east and west, with a large shed at its southern extremity. In the middle has been erected a temporary tent or awning. This ground is occupied by a sack and bag merchant. The bags repaired there have generally contained rapeseed, linseed, rice, or other grain. Great complaints have been made of this place, and consequently I have frequently visited it. The rape and linseed fall from the bags on to the ground, which is unpaved, lie there and rot; and after a shower of rain, the stench is most offensive. I borrowed a small scoop from a neighbouring grocer, and with it took up a quantity of the earth; there were almost as many maggots as there were seeds; it was a mass of living and crawling putrefaction. Nor is this all; clouds of dust issue from the bags, to the great annoyance of the neighbouring 16 tradesmen, filling their dwellings and injuring their goods. From seventy to one hundred females, women and girls, principally Irish, are employed in this locality, and may be seen, at any hour of the day, squatting about the yard and mending the bags. The obscene language and dirty habits of these women are a source of disgust to the whole neighbourhood. There is no convenience to the yard and, at the time of revisits in the early part of. the month, the ladies were in the habit of using for such a purpose a piece of ground, exposed to view on every side, about fifteen feet square, and situated to the south of the yard above described. On this spot, public decency was violated fifty times a day; and the secondary nuisance arising therefrom was as bad or worse than the original one. It seems ludicrous to serve a notice for a stopped drain or full cesspool, if such a human piggery as the one above delineated is to be tolerated in one of the most populous parts of the parish. I have confined my observations to the nuisance, and have not touched upon the demoralizing effect that such indelicacies must produce, among the younger branches of those who work on the establishment. The number of deaths registered during last month, was thirty-nine, rather above the average monthly mortality, but still ten under the corresponding month of last year. Nine deaths have occurred from diarrhoea, the parish being entirely free from all other epidemic disease. The number of cases of diarrhoea have, however, considerably diminished during the last week. Yours respectfully, September, 1857. W. MURDOCH. TWENTY-FIRST REPORT. Gentlemen, As the time for licensing slaughter-houses is now approaching, at the request of the Vestry-clerk (Mr. Hawks), I have carefully examined all the places used in Rotherhithe for the slaughter of cattle. Twelve licences were granted last year, and eleven of the persons who obtained them are again applicants. One slaughterhouse of the number, namely, that in Elephant-lane, attached to the premises formerly occupied by Mr. Onion, being shut up. They are generally in good order, and what few deficiencies existed in some have been, or are being, corrected, under my 17 supervision; and, with due submission to this Board, I can see no objection to a renewal of the licenses. Two other butchers, besides the eleven above-mentioned, have made application for licenses, viz., Mr. Adams, of Lower Yorkstreet, and Mr. Austin, of Rotherhithe-wall; the slaughterhouse of the former being at the back of his dwelling, that of the latter in Seven-step-alley. Both these places are clean, stone-paved, with good water supply, ventilation, and apparatus, and the neighbourhood round them is not overcrowded. I beg, therefore, to recommend them to the favour of the Vestry. There are no underground slaughter-houses in Rotherhithe. The numerous houses, mentioned in the Agenda Paper, either have full cesspools connected with them, or their drainage is imperfect. The following, however, deserve particular mention. At No. 8,'Swan-lane, there is no privy accommodation whatever; the inmates of the house are obliged to use the closet of a neighbour. At the White Cottage in Adam's-gardens, the privy is in a miserably filthy and dilapidated state; and, as there is no drain on the premises, all the slops are thrown into the open road. At Nos. 1, 2, and 3, Ivy-place, the cesspools are full, and the people complain of the scantiness of the water supply, a complaint which I am often obliged to hear in various parts of upper Rotherhithe. The Southwark and Vauxhall Company will, undoubtedly, have to make extensive alterations to meet the growing wants of an increasing population. The water-closets of each of the tenements 4 and 5, Paradiseplace, is a sort of cupboard, situated at the top of the house. A cistern is supposed to supply each closet, but as the cistern itself only receives the rain which runs from the roof, the water supply is desultory and irregular. The pipe also conveying the solid and liquid matter down to a drain under the flooring of the houses is leaky, and the lower part of the houses, more especially of No. 4, is often covered with liquid sewage, and smells abominably. The remedy for such a state of things would be either to put a trap and pan to the present closets and carry to the cisterns a proper and regular supply of water, or better still, to build new water-closets on some part of the premises. At the back of the yards of the houses, from 4 to 11, Westlane, there is an alley or passage between the yards and the neighbouring mill-stream. This alley is a receptacle for all sorts of offal, and is often in a most digusting state. The Inspector and myself have often visited the spot, and always found it in the same condition. The houses from 4 to 11, West-lane, c 18 being tenanted by a very poor and improvident class of persons, I would suggest that some steps be taken to keep the passage clear and free from nuisance. The houses on the east side of Berkeley-street have no drainage, all the refuse water, slops, soapsuds, &c., being thrown or run into a small ditch at the back of the yards, and located on the land of a market gardener. In the course of time the ditch has become full of stagnant sewage, and the stenches arising therefrom during the summer caused annoyance to the dwellers in Berkeley-street and Chester-terrace. The houses ought to be drained into the neigbouring sewer, and I am credibly informed, that on service of a notice, steps were immediately taken by the landlord to that effect. The sack merchant, spoken of in my last Report, on receiving a notice from this Vestry, struck his tent, and evacuated with all his troop, sacks, bags, and baggage the position which he had so long occupied on Rotherhithe-wall, to the great discomfort of his neighbours. Forty deaths were registered in this parish during the month of September, eight of these were from diarrhoea and dysentery; of the eight, six were children, one an adult, and the other an elderly female aged 83. Two cases of typhoid fever have proved fatal; one of these, a single person aged 18, imported it with her from Havre-de-Grace (France), where she had been in service. In the other case, a married woman of 24, the malady seems to have been generated in this locality. She resided in Swan-lane, about fifty feet from that part of the King's-mills' stream, which was described in my last Report, as one of the greatest nuisances in Rotherhithe, or any other part of the metropolis. The other epidemics, namely, measles, scarlatina, hoopingcough, and small-pox, have been absent from the neighbourhood during the whole of the summer, no death from any of them having been recorded since April last. I consider that at this present time (1st October, 1857), the number of cases of illness in Rotherhithe is under the average, and at the same time, I must state, that since April it has been freer from the four epidemics above-named, than I have ever before known it. Long may it continue so. During the quarter ending October 1st, 1857, one hundred and fourteen persons died, fifty-nine males, and fity-five females; and there were born one hundred and ninety-three children, ninety-eight males and ninety-five females, the excess of births over deaths, being seventy-nine. Yours respectfully, October, 1857. W. MURDOCH. 19 TWENTY-SECOND REPORT. Gentlemen, Your Officers have always considered it their first and most important duty, to penetrate into the dwellings of the humbler classes, and to introduce therein, as much as possible, cleanliness and order, without, which all attempts at social improvement must necessarily fail. Hanover-street, inhabited by the poorest people in Rotherhithe, has often been to them an object of solicitude. This street, sloping southwards down from the bank of the river consists with its appendage, Hanover-court, of about thirty-eight houses, two of which at the north end, are of modern construction, the remaining thirty-six are exceedingly old and inconveniently built. As a correspondence relative to the state of this property has recently taken place between the Vestry Clerk and the freeholder, the Inspector and myself were induced to examine it, not cursorily and superficially, but by a visitation from house to house, noting down the merits and demerits of the place, and the result of our obervations I have condensed in the following report. The houses, though old and out of repair, are tenantable, and with few exceptions, wind and water-tight, and not in worse condition than dwellings in other parts of the metropolis occupied by a similar class of population. The main-drainage of the street is excellent, a new sewer having lately been constructed by order of this Vestry. The drainage of the houses has also been, in every case, connected with the sewer, some few of the drains are untrapped, but the greater part of them have siphon-traps of glazed pottery with a coverlid of wood, a mode of trapping which appears fragile and imperfect. The privies are of wood, all in a dilapidated condition and without fastenings. A wooden button on the outside, and a piece of string on the inside of the doors, may be seen here and there. The leaseholder declares that he cannot employ metal as it speedily disappears from the premises. The privies are all fitted with pans and communicate with the sewer, but have no proper water supply; indeed there is not a cistern or water-butt in the whole street. Heaps of ashes are strewn about the yards, which are in a filthy state, the heap in the yard being the receptacle for all the refuse of the house. Much complaint is made of the neglect of the scavengers, who, according to the statement of the leaseholder, have not regularly and properly removed the dust, and have not put a broom on the surface of the street since February last. The cleansing has been entirely done by himself and the tenants. 20 The water supply of Hanover-street is good, the water having been carried into every yard in Hanover-street, and in Hanover-court where the tenements have no yards, the tap is placed under the window of the ground-floor. As in the latter case, there is no suitable receiving vessel; I am afraid that in time, the houses will become damp and unwholesome. All the receptacles for water are of the most miserable kind imaginable, pails, washing-tubs, earthenware pans, and butter-firkins supplying the place of butts and cisterns. Hanover-street has certainly improved under the management of the present proprietor, and the inhabitants get now, wholesome water to use and drink, which alone compensates for and palliates many evils. Even a short time ago, they had no water, but from a tidal pump, and the liquid after standing a few hours, smelt as I said in one of my former reports— as if it had been dipped from a sewer. To resume, in a few words, the main points are good, the defects are in the details. At the back of the dwellings, on both sides of the street, there is a large open space, which allows free circulation of air, and accounts to a certain extent, for the statements I am about to make. This street has been during the last two years, the healthiest in Rotherhithe, and it would be difficult to find a more healthful place in the whole metropolis. Medical orders are rarely given by the relieving Officer for the inhabitants; and in the year 1854, only one person died there of cholera; but, let numbers speak. The population of Hanover-street, taken in September, 1853, was seventy-nine males, ninety-three females, and one hundred and seventy-five children of both sexes, in all, three hundred and forty-seven. On the 30th October, of the present year, it amounted to sixty-four males, seventy-four females, and one hundred and forty-one children, in all, two hundred and seventy-nine; so that we may safely take the average population at about three hundred. During the last two years, only two have died, both children; giving a mortality of one per annum, or less than four in the thousand. Now, the average mortality in the metropolis, is about twenty-three in the thousand ; in the healthiest country districts, about twelve; and in all England, nineteen. Hanover-street, then, deservedly merits the name given to it— the \"Vale of Health.\" The place is swarming with children, about half of whom were barefooted, and many, no doubt, on short allowance, yet they looked comely, healthy, and hardy, and might be taken as good specimens of the water-side population. At 28, Princes Street, besides a full cesspool, and a choked drain, there is in the washhouse, a pool of stagnant sewage. 21 All the inmates of the place, complain of sickness and headache' and a woman employed to wash clothes on the premises, was' from the effect of the stench, suddenly seized with vomiting and purging, and forced to leave her work. She was in perfect health on entering the locality. Two children died in this house during the summer from diarrhcea. This nuisance requires immediate remedy. No. 2, Albert-place, Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, and 15, Bedford-place, and No. 15, Lower Neptune-street, are cases of imperfect drainage, and full cesspools. Although the mortality of the last month be considerably under the average, thirty-one deaths only having been registered, the Parish of Rotherhithe is hardly so healthy as it was in September. One death from hooping-cough and three from fever being recorded. Measles too, have re-appeared ; a woman of Hanover-street, brought the disease with her from Kent, where she had been hopping ; and from Hanoverstreet it has spread into the neighbouring districts of Swan-lane and Clarence-street. No fatal case has yet occurred. No death has been registered from scarlatina, smallpox, or diarrhoea. A lad, aged 18, died a few days ago from cholera in twelve hours, on board the Swedish Ship, \"Sophia,\" lying in the Commercial Docks. She came from Gottenberg. The cholera has always been brought into Great Britain from the Baltic Ports, and seamen on shipboard in vessels from these Ports lying in the Thames or Docks, have mostly, hitherto, been among the first attacked. Of the remote cause of cholera we know nothing, nor has science as yet unravelled the essential nature of ii, or the reason why it always travels in one direction from east to west. But of the means of preventing cholera, much is known. There are certain circumstances favourable to its development, receptive influences, as they have been justly called, and where these are wanting, the disease either does not appear at all, or exercises more mildly its baneful influence. These may be called proximate causes, and are quite under human control; they relate either to the locality or to the individual. In regard to locality, bad drainage, and bad water, are universally acknowledged to be the circumstances most propitious to the birth and propagation of cholera. In Rotherhithe, the drainage is better, and the water supply of purer quality than they have ever hitherto been, therefore, we are better prepared to receive the pestilence than heretofore. It were useless to repeat my previous reports by exhibiting to you how much these receptive influences gave, in this Parish, quite different characters to the epidemics of 1849 and of 1854. With regard to the individual, I can only say that the best 22 preventatives of cholera are a cheerful mind and a temperate life; and, were I to write a book, I could not say more. Fear, by depressing the powers of the mind and body, favours the reception of the disease. Systematic rules of diet have been laid down. I cannot approve of them; surely that diet is the best which keeps a man in a healthy state, and which enables him to pass comfortably through the daily wear and tear of life, and must, necessarily, be as variable as the constitution of every individual; and every one who observes himself, must certainly know what that diet, is or should be. All sudden changes of food in time of cholera, are imprudent and dangerous. But there is a class of men particularly liable to the malady, and to whom I would give a word of advice (for this report will go before the public), I mean the habitual drinkers of ardent spirits. In the experience of three epidemics which I have witnessed, one in France, and two in England; I have invariably found that they are the first, yes, the very first victims of cholera. Indeed, it stands to reason that it should be so. Whatever cholera may be, its first symptoms show themselves in the abdominal viscera, and what is the state of these viscera in the confirmed spirit-drinker? His stomach is perpetually congested, his appetite gone; his liver, like the worm of a whiskey-still, has alcohol always passing through it, and is generally functionally, and often organically diseased, and makes him a ready recipient for the complaint. Every dram of raw spirit is, in time of epidemic, a predisposing cause of cholera, and let those of our industrious classes who are fond of morning potations, take timely advice— There is death in the cup. Yours respectfully, November, 1857. W. MURDOCH. TWENTY-THIRD REPORT. Gentlemen, Variocs complaints having been made to me, by inhabitants of the part of Rotherhithe called Jamaica Level, and by owners of property in that district, of an intolerable nuisance occasioned by the casting of the mud of the mill-stream near the houses. I proceeded thither on the 12th November, and on several other occasions, and can state the following facts; namely, that the mud of the main channel, from its southern extremity, opposite Cork'sgardeh to a spot near Moreton-cottages, had been recently cast up. Part of it had been thrown against the western bank, where there is a public footway, but not on the footway, and only in sufficient quantity to mend the gaps that time had made on the 23 edge of the bank, near the stream. On the eastern embankment, the mud had been piled up in heaps, in different places ; indeed the greater part of what had been removed from the bed of the water-course had been thrown there. In Glebe-terrace, and thereabouts, it had been projected within a few feet of the dwellings; and in Moreton- terrace, so close to the walls and doors of the houses, that the pathway before them was literally covered with it, ,and the inmates forced to walk in and over the mud to get to and from their houses. Although the weather was cold at the time of my examinations, this accumulation of solid sewage, the settlings of a quarter of a century or more, exhaled a faint, sickening smell. No nuisance is more likely to generate disease than such a mass of decomposing organic filth. Ague and typhoid fever are likely to be engendered from such a cause, there being no fact in the whole range of medical science more clearly established, and more universally admitted, than that the effluvium. from, the mud of ponds and ditches is a subtile poison, always injurious, and often fatal, to the human constitution. At the back of Clare-hall-cottages, there is a large dustbin, which stands away from the tenements, and receives the ashes and refuse of several of them. The inmates complain that the scavengers do not remove the dust sufficiently often. I think that the contents of the dustbin ought to be carted away regularly once a week; and I have, through Mr. Sanders, the inspector, called thereto the attention of the contractor. At No. 12, Neptune-street, a house let out in lodgings and containing seventeen inmates; there is no privy and no drainage. I shall not attempt to describe the abominations of the back premises, in consequence of these defects; the case appears urgent, and wanting immediate remedy. This house has been for a long time in a deplorable condition, and has been frequently visited and reported on before. At Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, Gardiner-row, and 15, 16, 17, Debenham-row, Rotherhithe New-road; cesspools have been dug in the gardens, to receive the drainage of the houses. The quantity of liquid thrown down and the storm-waters soon fill the cesspools, which overflow, and convert the yards into lakes and ponds of sewage. There being no sewer in the neighbourhood, the only remedy for such a state appears to be, a frequent cleansing of the cesspools, unless the landlords be allowed to drain into a neighbouring open ditch. However undesirable draining into open ditches may be, in the abovementioned case, it would be infinitely preferable to what at present exists, by carrying the sewage further away from the dwellings, and into an open space, where the effluvia becoming diluted would, in all probability, be harmless. 24 An open ditch, beginning by a dead head at the southern extremity of Berkeley-street, after running a course of about two hundred and fifty or three hundred yards, discharges itself into the sewer in Swan-lane. The ditch itself is clean and without smell, and receives the drainage of ten small houses. It is a nuisance certainly, as all open ditches are; but a very small one, compared to the King's-mills stream, which is within a few yards of it, and on whose nearly stagnant water, green slime, mud, and putrefying vegetable matter, I have often commented in my former reports. Forty-three deaths were registered in Rotherhithe during November ; the monthly mortality having been increased by six inquests. The beginning of winter has had its usual effects upon the aged, the death of no less than ten persons above the age of 70 having been recorded; namely, six between the ages of 70 and 80; three, between eighty and ninety; and one of a nonagenarian, the widow of a mariner, residing in Paradisestreet. The epidemics prevalent are hooping-cough and measles ; four deaths have been caused by the former, and one by the latter. Yours respectfully, December, 1857. W. MURDOCH. TWENTY-FOURTH REPORT. Gentlemen, The manufacture of patent manure in open vessels, is always a nuisance, but varying in degree according to the materials employed. The worst kinds of effluvia are generated by the action of sulpuric acid upon raw bones, blood, pieces of skin, soot, sugarscum, and such-like ingredients. A strong acid smell also always pervades the atmosphere in the neighbourhood of the factories, while the mixing is going on. The sulphuric acid itself, being but slightly volatile, I suspect that particles of it are carried up by the numerous gases evolved in the process. These gases are injurious to the health; many persons have complained of nausea and headache, from their effects ; the acid fumes, too, are highly irritating to individuals with the least tendency to cough, or to any bronchial affection. The manufacture of patent manure has, however, of late, become an important branch of industry in Rotherhithe, and gives employment to a considerable number of the poorest class of the labouring population. It never has been the intention of any person connected with this vestry, either to 25 annoy the manufacturers or injure the labouring classes; but, at the same time, it is the duty of the officers to listen to all reasonable complaints of the inhabitants. Now, the comfort of the inhabitants, and the toleration of patent manure factories may be perfectly reconciled, by conducting the process of manufacture in closed vessels, instead of open troughs. The possibility of so doing was hinted at by me in one of my previous reports. The idea was, at the time, treated with derision by some gentlemen engaged in the trade, as being quite impracticable. That it is, however, practical and practised, may be witnessed by any one who chooses to visit the factory of Messrs. Brown and Co. at Globe-stairs. A stout cyclindrical vessel, in shape resembling a tar-barrel has been constructed under the superintendence of the manager. On one side of it is a flap or door which can be hermetically closed and bolted; this cylinder is destined to revolve, and one of the spindles on which it turns is hollow, and communicates with a tube. The tube disharges itself into the shaft, to the top of which is eighty feet above the level of the earth. The vessel holds five hundred weight, is easily charged, and discharged by opening the flap, and when charged is made to revolve by steam-power, eighteen or twenty times. By these revolutions the stuif is thoroughly mixed and the manure perfected. The gases given off during the operation escape through the spindle and tube into the shaft, and disperse themselves high up in the atmosphere. The compound is better mixed than when done in the usual way, time, labour and money are also saved. In consequence of a letter addressed to me in the beginning of the month, complaining of the stenches emanating from the premises of Messrs. Ashton and Proctor, near Lavender Dock, I visited them. The men were making manure in open vessels, and the smell in the street was so offensive, that remarks thereon were uttered by almost every passenger. A few days after my visit the nuisance was discontinued. To conclude, 1 am of opinion that patent manure may be made in properly closed vessels without nuisance, and that all manufacturers of that article, whose premises are offensive to the neighbouring inhabitants, should be compelled to erect proper machinery for conducting the operation of mixing in such a manner that the fetid gases exhaled therefrom be carried into a high shaft, and if they are still found to be a nuisance, that they be burned by passing through a coke fire before escaping into the air. A statement was made at the last meeting of this Board, that foul smells, injurious to the health of the neighbours, were given out from the premises 47 and 48, Lower Queen-street, and that 26 after rain, there existsd in the back yards, pools of stagnant water. I visited this place six times in rainy and dry weather. The drains are untrapped, and there is a pan, but no water supply to the the closet. The yards in other respects are clean and orderly, I never could perceive any foul smell, or did I observe any pool of stagnant water, and in this statement I am borne out by the testimony of the Surveyor and other Officers of this Vestry. At the Bell public-house in Church-street, the water finds its way occasionally into the cellar. 