CHAP. 12.
IF the putrefaction proceedeth most of the earth or
vppermost partes of the earth, as from stinking channells, standing
lakes, priuyes, or other polluted places, as dunghills, vncleane kept houses,
and such like, then there will be felt many sudden great stinches, and
vnsauerie smells, such as cannot be distinguished, or discerned,
what it is, or whereof it commeth, because it is confounded, beeing made of
diuers stinches: in that yeare there wil be many frogges, toades, venemous
wormes, fleas, and flyes.

CHAP. 13.
IF the putrefaction proceedeth from within the earth, then
venemous beasts and wormes will be seene more commonly aboue the earth,
and will breede vpon the earth, and many of them will die.

CHAP. 14.
THe putrefaction or virulent matter of infection now, is from
celestiall orbes principally, also from corrupt places, partly from
corrupt humours in man, begotten by the two former, and ill order in feeding
and sleeping, in idlenes and late walking abroad, and sitting vp.

CHAP. 15.
THe infection taken at the nostrills is more daungerous then
otherwise, because there are two organes or passages that lead to the
heart, from thence more, then from the mouth.

CHAP. 16.
THe putrified aire cannot passe so speedily to mans
heart, as to diuers other creatures by the instrument of smelling, which
is couered with a pellicle or filme, which is to be lifted vp before he can
smell by the ayre or fume: and that pellicle is grosser in man then in
other creatures: and therefore requireth the hotter or stronger fume to
mooue it. Secondly, the instrument of smelling is placed deeper in the
head, then in any other creatures. Thirdly, the instrument of smelling is
nigh the braine in man, which with the moysture doth hinder the naturall
complexion of the instrument of smelling, which is hot and drie,
attractiue or drawing vnto it.

CHAP. 17.
IF the putrefaction in the ayre be more hot then moist, then
it is more apt to destroy, and to be taken by the nostrills: first,
because the heat is subtile, and passeth vp speedily to the
pellicle, and mooueth with the fume or moisture. Secondly, for that the heat
doth resist the coldnes and moisture of the braine, the which are
hinderers of smelling.

CHAP. 18.
The complexion aptest to be infected, is the sanguine,
first, because the qualities in that complexion are
like vnto the qualities in the ayre, hot and moist, and therefore doth
entertaine the ayre the apter. Secondly, because these two qualities in
this complexion maketh it more conuertible, like the ayre, which will sooner
be made hotter or moister then any of the other elements. Thirdly, because
in this complexion, the passages leading to the humours about the heart,
and to the vitall spirits in the heart, are more large and spatious then in
any other. The reason is, for that blood naturall is not without his
vapours, which cause motion, and where most motion of blood is, there is
cause of extention, and the same is in this complexion.

CHAP. 19.
The aptest time for this complexion to entertaine the
virulent matter into the humours, is in the former spring especially: for
then blood increaseth, and passeth vp and downe, beeing not thoroughly
refined, and made the readier by his motion and impuritie to receiue it.

The aptest time for this complexion to entertaine the
virulent matter into the spirits vitall is sommer, by reason that the
blood beeing made hot, and the spirits likewise hot, and ayre continually
heating.