The next accident of vrine is the qualitie: and the qualities,
as witnesseth Mercuriale, according to the doctrine of the Arabian Physitians, are fiue: the smell, the tast, the sound, the touch, and the colour. As for the smell, vrines haue little or no smell, or else a sweet and pleasing smell, or finally a stinking smell. No smell, saith Mercuriall, proceedeth from no other cause then from the extinguishing of naturall heate: howbeit it may sometimes proceed from drinke of a cold qualitie, like as we see in cold countries, and the like complexions, the smell of the vrine is not so much to be discerned. rines smell well,either in regard of diet or drugs: but especially by meanes of a temperate heate concocting well. Stinking vrines come by foure seuerall meanes. 1. By meanes of cruditie and indigestion of the food. 2. By reason of putrefaction. Galen witnesseth, that whatsoeuer thing is putrified hath an euill fauoured smell.Wherefore in Pestilentiall feauers the vrines are most commonly of a stinking smell. As also if the vrines passe through any place oppressed with putrid vlcers; or yet if any purulent matter be mingled with them, they become stinking. 3. The too long retention of vrine in the bladder may make it to stinke. 4. The qualitie either of diet or drugs, (as hath bene said of the good smell of vrines) may likewise procure vnto it an euill smell. Looke at large what Sauonarola saith of this point, if thou be disposed to see further. But what certaintie doth the smell of the vrine affoord vs? whosoeuer shall thinke to helpe his vncertaine coniectures by the same, should leape out of the frying pan (as the prouerbe saith) into the fire. In the first place it is to be obserued, that as well in sicknesse as in health, vrines may offer no pleasing smell to the nose, and yet the party may be free from any danger at al. But because healthfull folkes seldome send their vrines to the Physitian, we will let them passe, and come to the sicke. I will let Scribonius speake for me. Concerning the sicks vrine (saith he) most do teach vs that stinking vrines signifie putrefaction of humours, in so much that by the difference of the smels, they take vpon them to iudge of the seuerall humours so putrified. O wise woodcockes! I willingly yeeld to them, that stinke or strong smell doth argue putrefaction in such vrines: but of which parts shall this putrefaction be? whether of the bladder onely, or of the Liuer also, of the chest, or other members? Nay so farre off is the stinking smell from giuing vs any particular notice of the disease,
that it cannot so much as affoord vs any certaine generall knowledge of the same. For many sweet smelling simples (saith Montanus) may cause a most stinking vrine. Cholericke and hote complexioned men void often very strong smelling vrines, howsoeuer free fro? any disease, as I haue often obserued in my selfe. And by what meanes, I pray thee, shouldst thou from the stinking smell of the vrine know putrefaction? or how can this putrefaction procure this stinking smell? If this were so, then would it necessarily follow, that whosoeuer were seised with a feauer proceeding from putrefaction of humours, should voyd stinking vrines, the which is most false. The truth of this assumption may from hence appeare, that for the most part among an hundred sicke of such feauers, scarce shalt thou find one of their vrines so to smell, nor yet their bloud at the opening of a veine. And for this cause well said Sauonarola in his treatise of Vrines, that there are other signes also to be obserued in the annoying of putrified members, if we purpose well and orderly to examine, trie and finde out any skill concerning vrines. And indeed a thousand causes there are which may alter and change their smell. By the smell then onely there can neuer be any certaintie collected to informe our iudgements concerning any disease. But I am afraid the Reader will take it ill, that I so long detaine him among so vnpleasing smels; and my selfe begin to waxe wearie of so vnworthie a thing, and as I neuer tooke any pleasure in the same, so here I leaue it to them that like it better. But if I should yet enter vpon the tast, I feare I should be worse taxed. I can tell no man their tast by mine owne experience. Salt they haue alwayes bene counted, as the teares likewise: If any be incredulous I will not hinder him. If our vrinemongers had no better beere allowed them, they would not so much adore the pissepot as some of them do. But yet if any purpose to practise this point, I wish him to go to the Arabians, who haue written so curiously concerning this point; and it may be, in regard of their aromaticall drugs, their vrines may be of better taste then those of our Europaeans, who feed on grosser food. As for the other two qualities, the sound and touch, we will send them all in one ship to Arabia with their fellowes: and now we come to the colours.