The Cause of this Disease is twofold: the Retention of the Seed, and the Menstruum, which are the materiall cause: and a cold and moist distemper of the Matrix, breeding phlegmatick and thick juices, which is the efficient cause: for when the Seed is retained, and the Menstruum hath not the customary, and usuall vent, they burthen the Matrix, and choak, and extinguish
the heat thereof: then upon the diminishing of the naturall heat, windy humours are bred, especially in the Matrix, which by nature is a cold, nervous, and bloudlesse part; after the same manner, if the seed be kept too long, it disturbeth the Function of the spiritous parts, and the Midriffe, it oppresseth the heart, causeth fainting and sounding fits, bindeth as it were, and girteth about the parts, and seemes in such a manner to stop the breath, that the sick woman is in danger to be strangled: her puls is sometimes weake, various, and obscure: she hath inward discontents and anxieties, and is most commonly invaded by, at least very subject unto Convulsion fits: she lies, as if she were astonished and void of sense: and from her belly you may heare rumbling, and murmuring noises; she breatheth so weakly, that it is scarce discernable, and indeed she is so sad an object, that the by-standers may easily mistake her to be dead. The drowsie and sleepy disease called Carus differs from this, because they who are affected with it, have the use of their breath free, without any molestation: and it differs from a Catalipsy (another drowsie disease, casting the ••ck into a profound and dead sleep) because
they who are taken with that, lie without any motion, but they who have the mother, are tormented with Convulsion fits, their legs and their hands are stretched and wrythed into unusuall figures, and strange postures; and by this it is distinguished from an Apoplexy, unto which it is exceeding like.

Galen wondreth how these women can live, who are troubled with these cruel fits of the Mother, without any puls, or breathing, in as much as it is impossible for one that liveth not to breath, or for on• that breatheth not, to live; for so long we live, so long we breath. To this I answer that although these women live without respiration, yet doe they not live without transpiration; for this being performed thorough the pores of the skin, by the motion of the arteries, conserves the sym• metry of the vitall heat; for then that small heat retiring to the heart, as to Castle, may bepreserved by this benefit of transpiration alone.

Now to procure an assurance, whith• the woman be living or dead, hold a feather, or a looking-glasse to her mouth, the former stir, or the latter be spotted it is an undoubted signe that she liveth.

This is a most acute Disease, and soone dispatcheth the sick woman, especially if it took beginning from somevery contagious, and poisonous vapours; lecherous women, and lusty widowes that are prone, and apt to Venery, are most subject to it: but married women that injoy the company of their husbands, and such as are with childe, are seldome invaded by it.

You must apply your Remedies in the ••t, and after the fit: in the fit, the humour just be drawn back with rubbing the parts, •ying painfull Ligatures about them, and applying Cuppinglasses, with scariffication to the calfes of her legs: have such Glysters in readinesse, as will take away the paine, dissolve, draw back, and purge out the thick humours: you may compound them by these formes following.

Take halfe an ounce of Elecampane roots.

The leaves of rue, penniroyall, Motherwort,and pellitory of the wall, of each a handfull.

Three drams of sena.

Bran, Camomile flowers, and the tops of Dill, of each halfe a handfull.

Bastard Saffron, and Annise seeds, of each two drams.

Boile them in a sufficient quantitie of
birthwort water to nine ounces, to the strained liquor being squeezed, and press very hard, add

Diaphenicon, and benedicta laxativa, of each an ounce.

Oyle of dill, and oyle of rue, of each s• drams.

Halfe an ounce of butter.

A dram and a halfe of salt.

Mingle them, and make a Glyster.

Carminative medicines must be laid upon the whole inward region, as fomentation made of the leaves of Rue, Motherwort, Penniroyall, the flowers of Melilot, and Camomile, or unguent. de Althea, with the oyl of Camomile, Dill, and Rue; for this loosen¦eth the passages by opening the pores, an expelling the winde; pessaries may be p•• up, made with Civet, Musk, and Amber but you must affront her nose with stinking odours, as the steame of brimstone, the smoke ascending from old shoes burn Partridge feathers, sagapenum galbanum, as fetida, and the like, cast into the fire; because the Matrix doth, as it were abhor, retreat, and flie from these things, whereas sweet things doe allure to them.

But some curious braine may here demand, why sweet things held to the nose
doe breed the fits of the Mother, and on the contrary, stinking things appease those fits? I answer; sweet things applyed to the Matrix, in regard that they are hot, doe expell the winde, cut into the slow and tenacious phlegm, and afterwards purge it out: but stinking things applied to the Nose, consume the ascending vapours with their heat; but you may still demand, if hot stinking things be good to break the winde, why may they not be laid to the Matrix, as well as sweet things? I answer? the Matrix embraceth, and meeteth sweet odours and perfumes, but unsavory and stinking sents it abhors, and flies from; for  ' tis a most certaine truth, that every creature, even by naturall instinct, shunneth inconveniences, and affecteth things convenient.


