
II. 
Or Hot Bitters.
A middle state of Vegetable Oyl, is observable  in Turpentine Plants, as in Hypericon; and their Smell and Taste will evince them to be pure Turpentine; their Taste is Bitterish and Astringent, and their Smell Terebinthinate: in these the Acid fixes much on the Earthy Parts, and produces an Astringency; whereby the Oyl is more loosned from it. 
It ' s well known, that all Turpentine and Gums have a latent Acid, whence they are more easily distilled by additions of Absorbents; and their true
Vertues best Extracted by Tinctura Satis Tartari. 
The Vertues of Turpentine Plants depending on the Oyl, are Pectoral, Cleansing, and Diuretick; and by their Astringent Faculty stopping; but by both Vulnerary: for what better Vulnerary can there be, than that which is Cleansing, and Astringent, and smells Balsamick, as Turpentine Plants These Plants do bear the name of Balsamick, which are Terebinthinate and Aromatick; as Botrys, Mecha-Balsam, Juniper, Ladanum segetum; and these are more agreeable to the Stomach, than ordinary Turpentine; and besides, their Vulnerary Faculty may be Cordial, they being also Aromatick.

To these I must add another Class of Balsamicks, which having Turpentine in their Smell, give a Smell like dead Nettle; so in red Lamium there is a Turpentine flavor, but another Smell is perceived also. 
In Panax coloni, and Sideritis, there is the same Dead-Nettle Smell; and in Galeopsis both Smells are perceivable.

A third degree of Balsamicks is in the Geranium Moschatum, and Geranium Columbinum, which taste Astringent, & smell of Musk; and since other Geraniums smell of Turpentine, but these of Musk, I do suppose that the highest state of the Oyl Vegetable, is a
rarefied Turpentine, which thereby becomes Odoriferous: Hence Terebinthinates taken inwardly, after a farther separation from their Acid, by the Salts of the Blood, cause a Violet Smell in the rine, because Aromaticks produce the same effects in the rine; therefore Aromatick Odors, and Turpentine, are of an agreeable nature. 
Many Turpentine Balsams are of an Aromatick Smell, as Balsam de Tolu, Balsam Mechae, Balsam Peruvian, Benjamin, Storax; and many Herbs, as Ladanum segetum, and Botrys, which have a Fragrant Terebinthinate Smell; and so has Juniper, Cedar, and Sassafras; besides Oyl of Turpentine will easily extract these Fragrant Oyls from Vegetables, and is frequently mixt with them by Sophistications; whence I may argue, that they differ only as Turpentine is mixt with a latent Acid; and as the other are more pure from Acid; and therefore more Aethereal or Odoriferous: The Roots of Valerian smell like Turpentine, and the Flowers like Jessamy a little dryed.

Strong Bitters, with a Fetid Odor, as Ballote; these by their Bitterness correct Acids in the Stomach and Blood, and by their Fetidness amend the Acid in the Nervous Juyce, and cause an equal expansive
motion of the Spirits, and prevent their unequal distribution into some Nerves, as in Fits of Convulsion.

Strong Bitters, with a Pungency, or Acrid Bitters, as in Celandine; these correct Acids, and open Obstructions also, by giving a quick motion to the Blood, which is done by their Volatile Bitter Oyl, and Volatile Pungent Salt, on which their Taste and Vertue depend.

Strong Bitters Aromatick, as in Wormwood and Eupatorium Cannabinum, they work by their Volatile Oyl and Salt on the Blood, and Stomach; whence they are accounted Antidotes against Coagulations, Venoms, and Pestilential Infections.

Strong Bitters only, or pure Bitters, without any Aromatick or Fetid Odor, or Pungency; such is the Bitterness in Bitter Almonds, and Centaury, their parts are more fixed than any of the other Strong Bitters: These cleanse the Stomach from Acid Phlegm; open the Liver, by correcting the coagulating Acids in the Blood; they mix with Acids, and pass by rine; they preserve the Blood from coagulation, and help the office of the crude Bile in Hydropical
Cachexies; they have an Astriction by their Acid and Earthy Parts, which abounding in Bitters, help the Oyl in correcting Acids. 
The Principles of Bitters united by the Fire, produce fixt Salts, which correct Acids better than Bitters; which also act as fixt Salts in all their effects.

Elder-Bitters and Smells, as in Scorphularia; these have a discussing Faculty outwardly, by their Fetidness and Bitterness.

Nauseous Tastes, which are, 

1. 
Nauseous-Bitter, which depends on a composition of Mucilage and Bitter, as in Bryony-Roots, Squills, Berries of Spina Cervina, and Fox-Gloves; the Mucilage in the Stomach relaxes the Fibres, and causes the Bitter to stick longer on them; and so to act more strongly in Vomiting and Purging; the same Taste is in Polygala and Sena.

2. 
A Nauseous Taste depends on a sweet Bitter, mixed with Mucilage and Pungency, as in Aloes, Agarick, Rubarb: And Docks want only the Sweetness; but have Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Astringency.

3. 
Too much Sweetness is Nauseous; so is Manna, Honey, Polypody-Root; a Sliminess or Gumminess is in Honey and Manna.

4. 
Too much Bitter is Nauseous: Thus, in sweet Gall, the over-much Sweet or Bitter, over-impregnates the Papillae in the Mouth and Stomach, and cause an aversion in the Stomach; as too much Light offends the Eyes, and makes them Water.

5. 
An ill Smell gives a Nauseousness; as in Aron Pouches, whose Smell will make any one vomit: And such have been the Smells of many Herbs which I bottled with warm Water, as Henbane and Spurge.
	
In Tastes depending on a Volatile Oyl of Vegetables, (with which is mixed a Pungent Volatile Salt) this Oyly Salt produces either an Aromatick or Fetid Smell, and a pleasant Aromatick or Offensive Taste. 
The Taste is Aromatick, when the Sense is briskly affected, and a pleasing Agitation of Spirits produced.

Aromaticks affect both the Smell and Taste gratefully; they have a motion of Particles and Texture, agreeable to the Motion and Texture of Spirits: Spirits of Vegetables differ nothing from their Oyly Salts but by their being largely diffused
in a Vehicle; and an Oyly Salt is a Spirit contracted, and without a Vehicle.

The effects of Aromaticks on the Body,  are to warm the Stomach, and discuss Wind; and these constitute the Class of the Sweet Aromaticks, or Fennil-Tastes: These are accounted Carminatives, because they rarefie the flatuous exhalations from the Chyle, in the primae viae, and so discuss them. 
These by their Sweetness allay the sharpness of Rheums, and lenifie their Acrimony: They are full of an Oyly Salt, by which they open the Passages of the Lungs and Kidneys: They extraordinarily discuss Tumors outwardly, by opening the Pores, and attenuating the matter included: The same Taste is spread through all the parts of the Plant, by the Oyly Salt: These Plants are umbelliferous.

An Oyl may be distilled from these Plants, which has the Taste, Smell, and Vertue of these Plants: Whence I conclude, the Taste and Smell to proceed from the Oyl and Volatile Salt associated.

The Second Class of Aromaticks, is the Bitterish Aromaticks, as Rosemary, Marjoram, Basil, Calamint, and Penny-Royal: By their Bitterness adjoyned to their Volatile
Oyl and Salt, they correct Acids in the Stomach, cleanse the Lungs, and open Obstructions in the Glands, caused by coagulate Serum. 
The same effect is produced by the Saline Pungent Oyl, in altering the Acids in the Glands of the Brain, in correcting and attenuating its Lympha, and Succus Nervosus; which, as all other Glandulous Humors, are prone to Stagnation, and Acidity: These Aromaticks by exciting their Motion, correcting Acidities, and thereby rendring the Succus Nervosus more Volatile, deserve the name of Cephalicks; and it ' s not improbable, that the Volatile parts dispose the Medicine to circulate towards the Brain, as Windy Liquors disturb the Head, and no other part. 
These Medicines evacuate Serum from the Blood, promote its circulation, and attenuate all the Humors of Chyle, Serum, Lympha, and Succus Nervosus; these agree in Virtue with the Fennil Class, except that these work more by their Bitterness, as well as by the Pungent Oyl.

The same Taste in these is spread through the whole Plant; only the Bitterness depends on a fixt Oyl or Terebinth; but the Aromatick on the Oyly Salt.

Aromatick-Acrids, as Pepper, Ginger; these 
have a very Acrid Volatile Salt and Oyl. 
All Aromaticks are Cordial, by rarefying the Blood by their Volatile Parts; but the Acrid-Aromatick is the highest, having most Volatile Salt in it; whereas the former have more Oyl than Salt. 
These Acrid-Aromaticks have either a Sweetness, or Bitterness; and may be referred to the former Classes.

Aromatick-Astringents: As Aromaticks,  they are Cordial; and from their Astringency, they strengthen the Fibres of the Stomach and Membranes, and all Nervous Parts; and by an Acid evident in their Astringency, they hinder the greater Rarefaction of the Blood by their fragrant pungent Oyl.

CHAP. 
VIII. 
Of Tastes joyned to Fetid Smells, making them contrary to Aromatick.
WHEN the Oyl and Salt of Plants are in very great Proportion in any Plant, so as to emit violent Steams, offending the Organ of Smelling, but chiefly (forcibly) repelling the Spirits towards the Brain, (which creates an Aversion to it) a Fetid Smell is perceived.

That a Fetor proceeds from Oyls, appears by the Smell of Rancid Oyl, and all distill ' d Oyly Substances; as Fat, Butter, and Oyl-Olive distill ' d.

That a Fetor, in the highest Degree, has also a Volatile Salt admixt, is proved by the Excrements of Animals, putrefied Flesh, rine, Blood, and putrefied Vegetables; which yield a Volatile Salt. 
It does appear by divers Herbs bottled with Water for two Months, that a Fetor is produced; from the Mucilaginous, as Mallow-Leaves; from the Bitter, as Artichoak-Leaves;
from the Narcotick, an exceeding Fetidness, as Henbane-Leaves; from the Excoriators, as Spurge: These smelling like the Excrements of Animals. 
Horse-radish smelt like Garlick; Sorrel like Horse-dung. 
Putrefaction concurrs to produce these Fetors, by Separation of a Volatile Oyl and Salt, from the Acids and Earthy Parts of the Plants: So Spirit of Soot has an Oyly Salt; and the Fetid Oyly Salt is easily separated from rine and Blood, after Putrefaction. 
Many Acrid Plants are Fetid; so Sophia Chirurgorum, and the Pouches of Aron, are abominable. 
Cotula Faetida, Nettles, Garlick, and Onyons, have an Acrid Taste, and are very Fetid:. 
So is Galbanum, Assa Faetida, and Sagapenum. 
Divers Bitters are Fetid, as stinking Horehound; and all Elder-Smells, as Scrophularia, are Bitter-Fetid: So the stinking Gums are Bitter, as well as Acrid and Fetid.

The Mucilaginous are also Fetid, as in Atriplex olida. 
That there is but a Difference in degree betwixt Aromatick, and Fetid Plants, appears by many Instances; as Galeopsis smells Fetid at first handling, afterwards Aromatick. 
The Flowers of Valerian are very strong, and offensive at first getting; after a little drying, they are Aromatick: So in the Preparations of Musk
and Civet, if in a great quantity, or while fresh, they stink; afterwards, in a small quantity, they are more grateful: So the Leaves of Coriander stink; but the Seed is Aromatick. 
Elder-Leaves are Fetid, yet the Flowers are very Fragrant; so are the Flowers of Saponaria, though the Leaves resemble Elder. 
The Blossoms of most Trees are Fragrant, though the Leaves smell Crude.

From the afore-mention ' d Instances,

Fetids are
1. 
Bitter.
2. 
Acrid.
3. 
Mucilaginous, which are generally Narcoticks.
From the afore-mention ' d it may be inferr ' d, that Fetids inwardly are of a very hot Nature, discussing Tumors outwardly, and opening the Pores. 
Inwardly, Fetids, by their Volatile Parts, do pierce the Channels of the Nerves, mend the Crudity of their Nervous Juyce; and by their Faetor, they excite a different Motion from that in Hysterick Fits, and in Convulsions; and do remove the Cause of that tumultuous Motion in the Spirits, by correcting Acidities, and Stagnation in the Succus Nervosus, which is disposed to them, as all other Glandulous Liquors be.

Narcoticks have all of them an heavy offensive Smell, like Poppies, or Solanum; or have a sweet heady Smell, like Roots of Bears-Ears.
Milky-Narcoticks taste Mucilaginous, Bitter,  and Acrid; as Poppies, and Lettice: The Milky Juyce is an Argument of an Oyl, and the Acrid of a Volatile Salt adjoyned. 
Opium is a Bitter-Acrid, has a Resin, and Gum inflammable: Though it ' s easily extracted by the Spirit of Wine, yet the Bitterness and Acrid, in which its Vertue is founded, is most corrected by Spirit of Vinegar, Juyce of Lemons, Juyce of Quinces, or any other Acid, as well as by drying it, and evaporating some Part of the Narcotick Fume.

The Second Class may be of Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Mucilaginous Narcoticks; as Solanum Lethale, Bacciferum, Stramonium, Cynoglossum: Besides the Pungency, Solanum Lignosum has a Bitterness: The Roots of Cynogloss boyl ' d, smell like Spirit of Harts-Horn.

Fresh Tabaco smells Narcotick about the Flowers, and is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Acrid: It much resembles Henbane by its Figure, Oyl and Clamminess to the Touch;
but by its Bitterness and Pungency, Solanum Lignosum.

The Third Class of Opiates, is Sweetish,  Acrid, and Fetid, differing from Poppy smell, as Cicutaria, Napellus. 
The Roots of Henbane are very sweet.

These produce Giddiness, with a stupor; and their best Antidote are Acids, as Vinegar.

The Fourth Class has a Bitterish Acrid  Taste, as Cowslips; and these have also a Fragrancy very heady, being of a low degree amongst Opiates: The Roots of Cowslips are very Acrid and Bitterish.

By the afore-mentioned Instances it appears, that Opiates have very hot Effluviums, which offend the Smell. 
By the same, Opiates inwardly produce Sweat in so small a quantity as one or two grains; and are very Fetid by their Oyly Acrid Salt, which runs through all the Classes of Opiates. 
The Bitterness and Sweetness in some Opiates, no way conduce to encrease their Soporifick quality, but are different in many Opiates.

Narcoticks taken inwardly, immediately affect the Nerves in the Stomach, and produce an heaviness there; which I have been
sensible of, in tasting the Solanum, and Poppies; and they cannot pass a Digestion and Separation, nor by a circulation arrive at the Brain, so soon as their effects are produced therein: Therefore Narcotick Fumes must pass through the Pores of the Nerves, and begin to fix the Spirits in the Membranes and Nerves of the Stomach; by which a stupor is communicated to the rest. 
Something of the Opiates passes a Digestion, and afterwards a Circulation through the Blood; where it makes no alteration by its Narcotick quality; but being Bitter and Acrid, it produces a Diaphoresis, as others of that Taste do. 
In the Nerves these Narcotick Fumes weaken the brisk expansion of the Spirits, (which causes waking) and their too great Agitation, (which causes pain) and likewise stops their Tumultuous motion in Convulsions, and the violent motion of the Heart and Pulse, as well as any Flux of Humors whatsoever, by abating the violent contractions of the irritated Fibres. 
Humors that are Acid are corrected by the Acrid Taste and Bitterness; but Choler can no other ways be helped, but by abating the Acid combined with it, and making it corrosive, as well as by stopping the motion, and evacuation of it. 
From the Symptoms allayed by Narcoticks, I argue, That they
work not as Oyls and Volatile Salts, though they have them; for they rather produce an expansion, agitation, and tumult in the Spirits: And I also conjecture, that the Narcotick Faculty is best deducible from such a combination of the Volatile Oyl and Salt, with a Mucilage, as to gain thereby a particular Figure, Motion, or Texture; by reason of which, it weakens the motion of the Spirits, and in too great a quantity destroys their fluidity.

Burnt Alum mixt with Gun-Powder, destroys its Elastick force, and weakens the burst of a Gun. 
Water loses its fluidity by the small Particles of Cold: And Mercury is made Solid, by the Fumes of Lead. 
Nothing can be more easily fixt, by divers additions of other things, though in it self it has a greater Agitation of parts than other fluids, which being stopt in their internal motion, become Solids; and if Opiates do weaken or deprive the Nervous Juyce of its Internal Agitation, from thence all their Phaenomena may be explain ' d.

All Narcoticks have offensive Smells, by which we are taught by Nature to avoid them; and this Antipathy can proceed from nothing, but the disagreeable Texture and Motion of the Narcotick Fumes to our
Spirits: Opiates cause not Sleep, unless in great quantity, in Consumptive Bodies; for in them, a little quantity troubles the Head, and disturbs the Spirits with Giddiness, because their Spirits are very hot and fiery, and their motion, for want of a serose Vehicle, very violent; but it seems not probable, as some conjecture, that one grain of Opium should force so much Serum to flow to the glandules of the Brain, as to fill them, and produce Sleep, by too much diluting the Spirits: Whereas we frequently drink a full Gallon of Water, or other Liquors, which supply a greater quantity of Serum, without causing Sleep. 
Opiates by their sharp Acrid Salt stimulate, as Venereals; and by their Bitter Sliminess and Acrimony, they purge.

A slimy Mucilage attends Opiates, which outwardly has a good effect to temper Heat in Inflammations; whilst the Effluviums that are Narcotick, abate the Agitation of Spirits.

By their Mucilage; Opiates may repel, and also inwardly given, by the same they allay sharpness of Coughs, and corrosive Salts; whilst their Narcotick Fumes fix the motion of Humors, by robbing the Spirits of their Activity; by their Bitter-Acrid they discuss; and by their Mucilages mollifie
Tumors; as inwardly, their Bitter-Acrid corrects the Acid; the Mucilage tempers the Choler; and for this end the Poppy-Syrups and Waters, are the best; having more Mucilage than Acrid or Bitter. 
But Opium more Bitter and Acrid, than Mucilage; wherefore it is more convenient in Acid Humors.

CHAP. 
IX. 
Of Volatile Salts, and the Tastes and Vertues depending on them.
IN many Plants, there is a Volatile Salt, discernable by the Acrid Pungency, produced on the Tongue; as in Aron-Roots. 
That this Pungency is a Volatile Salt, though it has no Saltish Taste, appears by the following Experiment. 
I distilled some Mustard-seed in a Retort, which afforded both Oyl and Spirit; which being rectified, turned Syrup of Violets green; though this Salt, in its natural state, will not so readily turn Syrup of Violets, as Animal
Salts do. 
The Infusion of Aron-Roots in Water, did a little green the Syrup of Violets, after some time. 
Spirit of Scurvy-Grass, or Aqua Raphani composita, would not turn Syrup of Violets; nor Horse-Radish-Roots, infused in Water; tho '  the leaves bottled with Water, turned the Syrup after some time.

Juyce of Aron-Roots would not turn it; the Leek-Roots sliced into Water, mixt with Syrup of Violets, turned it after a long time.

The mixture of other Principles with the Salt, hinder its greenning of the Syrup of Violets: So a Decoction of Harts-Horn for the same reason, will not do what the Spirit does in turning the Colour. 
It ' s well known that Vinegar, and other Acids, as Lemmon, Citron, Sorrel, do best correct the Pungent Acrimony of the Vegetable Salts; and therefore Vinegar is used in Sallets; Oyl is used for the securing of the Stomach from their corrosive Acrimony: Yet the Acrid Salt of Vegetables will not ferment with Acids, as the Animal Salts do. 
Juyce of Aron-Roots, and Spirit of Scurvy-Grass, will not ferment with Oyl of Vitriol.

These different Classes, I have observed in the Volatile Salts of Plants.

The Watry-Acrid having a pungent Smell,  like Mustard or Scurvy-Grass, and the Cresses: These have a tolerable Pungency, and but a little Oyl with their pungent Salt. 
The Vertue of these Cress-tasted Plants, is first from their Salts, which excite Appetite, and volatilize the Acid Ferment in the Stomach, and therefore are Stomachicks: In the Blood they amend the coagulating Acids, open Obstructions in the Spleen and Brain, and all the Glandules; and therefore are Antiscorbutick, Splenetick, Diuretick, and Sudorifick; outwardly they discuss, and have the Virtues of Volatile Salts, in Pains, and Scald-Heads, and Scorbutick Spots.

By the Watry crude Parts adjoyned, they temper their own Acrimony, and make it more agreeable to hot Bloods; as in Brooklime. 
I distilled Colewort-Roots, which tasted like Horse-Radish; and had an Acid mixt with Pungency, which would not turn Syrup of Violets; this distillation was in Sand, in a glass Retort. 
There are many degrees of Pungency in this Class; so that choice may be made for particular Constitutions.

There is a Bitterness in many of this Class, which helps the Operation of the Acrid: if the Acrid prevails, they belong
to this Class; if the Bitter, they are referrible to the Bitters with Acrimony.

The second Class of Volatile Salts, is in rank Tastes, and smells like Garlick and Onyons, whose Smells are rank Fetid, and their Tastes very pungent Hot. 
From Horse-Radish Leaves, bottled up with Water two Months; and from their smelling like Garlick, as well as from their pungent Taste, and quick flying up the Nose and Eyes, like Sal-Ammoniack, I conclude, that the Cepaceous kind, would very properly constitute a second degree of Volatile Salts, and a much stronger than the former. 
They correct Acids, and Phlegm in the Stomach; and excite Appetite by their Pungency: they attenuate the Phlegm in the Lungs, and open Obstructions there, by their Volatile Salt; and therefore are good Pectorals and Stomachicks: They alter the Blood, as Volatile Salts; and are good against Infection, and the Scurvy; and as Diureticks, by their Salts they are good for the Dropsie: outwardly they discuss more than the former Class; and their Mucilaginous Roots are emollient, and ripen Apostumes; and by their Salt they draw forcibly, and discuss and attenuate. 
Thlaspi tastes like Horse-Radish, and smells like Garlick.

The third, and highest degree of Vegetable Acrid-Salt, is in the Exulcerators, Vesicatories, or Corrosive Tastes: These have an Acrimony that destroys the Organ of Tasting; as among Animals a fierce Volatile Salt is in Cantharides, which is Vesicatory: And strong Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack blisters the Tongue. 
So in the first Class of Exulcerators, there is a very Acrid Taste, and quick pungent Scent, depending on the Salt only; the Plant being Watry, having no strong Oyly Smell: and these may be called Watry Exulcerators; as the Ranunculus, Anemone, Aron, Dragons, Ranunculus flammeus: Vesicatories pierce the Pores, and by their pungent Acrimony irritate the Glandules in the Cutis, to send forth their Serum, and separate the Cuticula into a Blister.

The Corrosives have a higher degree of Acrimony; they pierce the Cuticula and Cutis, with Pain; they alter and tear their Pores, drive out their Serum, and thereby induce an lcer, and corrosion of the Cutis.

Note, That the first Class is Vesicatory,  or Corrosive Watry.

The second Class is where the Volatile 
Salt is mixt with a hot fiery Oyl; as in Euphorbium, Ivy-Gum; and these Plants have a strong Smell, with an Acrid Taste.

The Milky or Resinous Exulcerators, have an Oyl more fixt, joyned to an Acid-Acrid Salt; as Tithymalus, and Esula; and these smell Acid, rather than of any hot Scent. 
Mezereon, and Laureola, have a faint Lily-Smell; in these the Oyl is not much conducing to any Corrosiveness: But that depends on the Volatile Salt alone, made more Volatile by addition of some Oyl.

