But it is not to cases such as those now related, numerous as 
they are, nor to any other of a kindred type, in which diseased action or constitutional peculiarity may be urged as a cause of the serious morbid affections produced, that the evil effects of this nauseous
exhalation are confined. Families in which there have been no such 
serious symptoms produced, but who, from the situation of their residences, are exposed to its influence, have still to endure all the discomfort of an abominable public nuisance when they move abroad, or, 
when the wind is high, be subjected to its presence in their apartments. 
 
In the letter on the subject with which we have been favoured by 
Dr Mackenzie, from which we have already quoted, the reader will 
see the extent of the annoyance arising from this civic and domestic 
plague to the families living in the fashionable neighbourhood in which 
the doctor resides. 
 
“ When I first occupied a house upon this hill (the Calton) in 1833, 
 
I found (or then imagined I did) that when the wind was from the 
east or north-east, some disagreeable smells were conveyed by it. 
 
In the year following I became convinced that it was so; bad enough 
during the influence of easterly winds in March, April, and May, but 
sickening and almost intolerable in the warm months, when the wind 
was from the same quarter. Since then, 1834, till now, 1839, this 
nuisance has greatly increased, not alone when inhaling it upon the
Terrace, but actually within our rooms, and even when the windows 
are not open, until at length I have all but resolved to quit a situation 
which I deem to be the most delightful in Edinburgh as a place of 
residence, and, I Would add, but for this nuisance, by far the most 
healthful. Yet I believe our cause of complaint is not confined to 
the Hill Terrace, but that it extends to Leith Walk, and yet further 
north ; and if this is so, how far less endurable must it be to the occupants of houses yet nearer to ‘ Stinkomalce’ than that which I now 
write from in Carlton Place.” 
 
So distressing is this nuisance to the families resident in that quarter, that on every occasion when the wind blows in the direction of 
their houses from the marshes and tanks, they are compelled to shut 
up the windows to prevent the intrusion of this noxious exhalation. 
The windows on the side of the quadrangle of the Palace of Holy
rood contiguous to the Foul Burn and irrigated lands, are regularly closed whenever there is the slightest breath of wind from that quarter, to prevent the apartments from being filled with the effluvium.  Complaints like these we have just enumerated have been of long duration, and have only increased from the extension of the nuisance by which they have been caused.  At the trial in 1809, -^-to the evidence produced at which we have already referred, — many of the witnesses bore testimony to the misery and discomfort which they suffered from their proximity to the ponds and stagnating waters.   Colonel Leathom, of the 4th Dragoon Guards, who had been quartered with his regiment from May 1801 till August 1802 at Piershill Barracks, deponed,   “ That he was frequently sensible of a most disagreeable and offensive smell while he was in the barracks, which he was certain proceeded from the stagnant water at Restalrig. On going down to
Leith with his regiment on two or three occasions, the stench was so very strong that for the instant it sickened him. There were frequent conversations among the officers respecting this offensive smell, and in particular they expressed their surprise that the barracks should be built so near to such a nuisancer   The surprise of the officers of the 4th has been shared, we believe, as already stated, by those of every regiment that ever was quartered in that unwholesome station ; but the wonder ought to be why no attempt has ever been made by the Government authorities to remove the evident and only cause of insalubrity — the surrounding marsh.   Mr Scougall, the then proprietor of Marionville, who was also on the trial, appears to have been as much annoyed by this nuisance as his successor of the present day, Mr Glass, whose opinion we have recorded elsewhere. Mr Scougall thus feelingly alludes to the domestic privation he was compelled to endure, and to which the inhabitants of that neighbourhood, and all the contiguous districts of Edinburgh, are still subjected, and in a greatly augmented form. Mr S.
deponed,  “ That he can say, in the strongest terms, that the comfort of himself and family is lessened by the vicinity of these ponds. His family have sometimes in the summer to keep their windows shut, in order to exclude the bad smell from these ponds.”        The Rev.
Robert Walker, at that time minister of the Canongate Church, another of the witnesses, deponed,  “ That many a time he had felt a smell offensive in a very high degree in the grounds of Marionville to the south of the house, insomuch as to sicken him ; and particularly once, at the foot of the garden, where he felt so very offensive a smell that it sickened him , and l he was unwell for two days.”  Although from their situation the inhabitants of certain districts of the town are more exposed to this nuisance than others, there is no district entirely exempt from its effects. Encircling, as these irrigated fields do, nearly three fourths of our landward frontier, there is no ingress or egress to or from the City without encountering the annoyance. Half the pleasure-walks in the neighbourhood are deteriorated by its presence. However much the beauty of the surrounding natural scenery may delight the fancy, and its green verdure please the eye, the insupportable odour for ever present in the atmosphere inevitably destroys and dissipates all enjoyment. To all classes in their out-door recreations this nuisance is a source of intolerable annoyance ; but the poor are perhaps more under its influence than the wealthier classes, as from their circumstances they cannot command the same amount of locomotive power. To the latter a few miles of space is comparatively nothing, as it can be readily passed, and the open country attained, where an uncorrupted soil and a
oure atmosphere are to be met with, ready to contribute to their renvigoration and pleasure. But with the poor mechanic and his family he case is sadly reversed. They must necessarily confine their pronenade within a narrower range, and seek, as it were, on the very ; erge of this Lernian marsh, that health which its putrid effluvia for)id them to enjoy. To this class of the community, unless the toil ind expense of an absolute journey be undertaken, there is no avoidng the nuisance — no procuring the enjoyment of a pleasure-walk, ffemmed in on every side by a smoking fen, there seems no outlet >ut the pinnacle of Arthur Seat, for the lower summit of the Calyon Hill affords him no immunity from this annoyance of the all-prealent enemy.  The passengers by public conveyance are annoyed to an equal exent, and the nuisance forms a never-ending subject of complaint and xecration among the company of the railway train and stage-coaches idiich have to pass through or within the margin of the fetid marsh, dr Rankin, the superintendent of the railway, informs us, “ that ie, or the officers employed by him, have almost constant opportulities of hearing the passengers lamenting the grievous nuisance to rhich so populous a neighbourhood is exposed.” 