

It seems highly probable that, as has been especially emphasized by Hagen, perfumes were primitively used by women, 
not as is sometimes the case in civilization, with the idea of 
disguising any possible natural odor, but with the object of 
heightening and fortifying the natural odor. If the primitive 
man was inclined to disparage a woman whose odor was slight 
or imperceptible, — turning away from her with contempt, as 
the Polynesian turned away from the ladies of Sydney : "They 
have no smell!" — women would inevitably seek to supplement 
any natural defects in this respect, and to accentuate their 
odorous qualities, in the same way as by corsets and bustles, 
even in civilization, they have sought to accentuate the sexual 
saliencies of their bodies. In this way we may, as Hagen suggests, explain the fact that until recent times the odors preferred 
by women have not been the most delicate or exquisite, but the 
strongest, the most animal, the most sexual : musk, castoreum, 
civet, and ambergris. 

In that interesting novel — dealing with the adventures of a Jewish 
maiden at the Persian court of Xerxes — which under the title of 
Esther has found its way into the Old Testament we are told that it 
was customary in the royal harem at Shushan to submit the women to 
a very prolonged course of perfuming before they were admitted 
to the king: "six months with oil of myrrh and six months with 
sweet odors." {Esther, Chapter II, v. 12.) 

In the Arabian Nights there are many allusions to the use of perfumes by women with a more or less definitely stated aphrodisiacal 
intent. Thus we read in the story of Kamaralzaman: "With fine incense I will perfume my breasts, my belly, my whole body, so that my 
skin may melt more sweetly in thy mouth, O apple of my eye!" 


Even among savages the perfuming of the body is sometimes practiced with the object of inducing love in the partner. Schellong states 
that the Papuans of Kaiser Wilhelm's Land rub various fragrant plants 
into their bodies for this purpose. {Zeitschrift fur Ethnologic, 1899, ht. 
i, p. 19.) The significance of this practice is more fully revealed by Haddon when studying the Papuans of Torres Straits, among whom the 
initiative in courtship is taken by the women. It was by scenting 
himself with a pungent odorous substance that a young man indicated
that he was ready to be sued by the girls. A man would wear this
scent at the back of his neck during a dance in order to attract the
attention of a particular girl; it was believed to act with magical certainty, after the manner of a charm (Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits, vol. v, pp. 211, 222, and 328).

The perfume which is of all perfumes the most interesting
from the present point of view is certainly musk. With ambergris, musk is the chief member of Linnseus ' s group of Odores
ambrosiacce, a group which in sexual significances, as Zwaardemaker remarks, ranks besides the capryl group of odors. It
is a perfume of ancient origin ; its name is Persian 1 (indicating
doubtless the channel whence it reached Europe) and ultimately derived from the Sanskrit word for testicle in allusion
to the fact that it was contained in a pouch removed from the
sexual parts of the male musk-deer. Musk odors, however,
often of considerable strength, are very widely distributed in
Nature, alike among animals and plants. This is indicated
by the frequency with which the word "musk" forms part of
the names of animals and plants which are by no means always nearly related. We have the musk-ox, the musky mole,
several species called musk-rat, the musk-duck, the muskbeetle; while among plants which have received their names
from a real or supposed musky odor are, besides several that
are called musk-plant, the musk-rose, the musk-hyacinth, the
musk-mallow, the musk-orchid, the musk-melon, the muskcherry, the musk-pear, the musk-plum, muskat and muscatels,
musk-seed, musk-tree, musk-wood, etc. 2 But a musky odor
is not merely widespread in Nature among plants and the
lower animals, it is peculiarly associated with man. Incidentally we have already seen how it is regarded as characteristic of some races of man, especially the Chinese. Moreover,
the smell of the negress is said to be musky in character, and


among Europeans a musky odor is said to be characteristic of
blondes. Laycock, in his Nervous Diseases of Women, stated
his opinion that "the musk odor is certainly the sexual odor
of man"; and Fere states that the musk odor is that among
natural perfumes most nearly approaching the odor of the sexual secretions. We have seen that the Chinese poet vaunts
the musky odor of his mistress ' s armpits, while another Oriental saying concerning the attractive woman is that "her navel
is filled with musk." Persian literature contains many references to musk as an attractive body odor, and Firdusi speaks
of a woman ' s hair as "a crown of musk," while the Arabian
poet Motannabi says of his mistress that "her hyacinthine hair
smells sweeter than Scythian musk." Galopin stated that he
knew women whose natural odor of musk (and less frequently
of ambergris) was sufficiently strong to impart to a bath in
less than an hour a perfume due entirely to the exhalations
of the musky body; it must be added that Galopin was an enthusiast in this matter.

The special significance of musk from our present point
of view lies not only in the fact that we here have a perfume,
widely scattered throughout nature and often in an agreeable
form, which is at the same time a very frequent personal odor
in man. Musk is the odor which not only in the animals to
which it has given a name, but in many others, is a specifically
sexual odor, chiefly emitted during the sexual season. The sexual odors, indeed, of most animals seem to be modifications of
musk. The Sphinx moth has a musky odor which is confined
to the male and is doubtless sexual. Some lizards have a musky
odor which is heightened at the sexual season; crocodiles during the pairing season emit from their submaxillary glands a
musky odor which pervades their haunts. In the same way
elephants emit a musky odor from their facial glands during
the rutting season. The odor of the musk-duck is chiefly confined to the breeding season. 1 The musky odor of the negress
is said to be heightened during sexual excitement.


The predominance of musk as a sexual odor is associated
with the fact that its actual nervous influence, apart from the
presence of sexual associations, is very considerable. Fere
found it to be a powerful muscular stimulant. In former times
musk enjoyed a high reputation as a cardiac stimulant; it fell
into disuse, but in recent years its use in asthenic states has
been revived, and excellent results, it has been claimed, have
followed its administration in cases of collapse from Asiatic
cholera. For sexual torpor in women it still has (like vanilla
and sandal) a certain degree of reputation, though it is not
often used, and some of the old Arabian physicians (especially
Avicenna) recommended it, with castoreum and myrrh, for
amenorrhoea. Its powerful action is indicated by the experience of Esquirol, who stated that he had seen cases in which
sensory stimulation by musk in women during lactation had
produced mania. It has always had the reputation, more especially in the Mohammedan East, of being a sexual stimulant
to men ; "the noblest of perfumes/ '  it is called in El Ktab, "and
that which most provokes to venery."




Not only is musk the most cherished perfume of the
Islamic world, and the special favorite of the Prophet himself,
who greatly delighted in perfumes ("I love your world," he is
reported to have said in old age, "for its women and its perfumes"), 1 it is the only perfume generally used by the women of
a land in which the refinements of life have been carried so
far as Japan, and they received it from the Chinese. 2

Moreover, musk is still the most popular of European
perfumes. It is the perfumes containing musk, Piesse states in
his well-known book on the Art of Perfumery, which sell best.
It is certainly true that in its simple form the odor of musk
is not nowadays highly considered in Europe. This fact is
connected with the ever-growing refinement in accordance with
which the specific odors of the sexual regions in human beings
tend to lose their primitive attractiveness and bodily odors generally become mingled with artificial perfumes and so disguised.
But, although musk in its simple form, and under its ancient
name, has lost its hold in Europe, it is an interesting and significant fact that it is still the perfumes which contains musk
that are the most widely popular.

Peau d ' Espagne may be mentioned as a highly complex and
luxurious perfume, often the favorite scent of sensuous persons, which really owes a large part of its potency to the presence of the crude animal sexual odors of musk and civet. It
consists of wash-leather steeped in ottos of neroli, rose, santal,
lavender, verbena, bergamot, cloves, and cinnamon, subsequently smeared with civet and musk. It is said by some, probably with a certain degree of truth, that Peau d ' Espagne is of

all perfumes that which most nearly approaches the odor of a
woman ' s skin; whether it also suggests the odor of leather is
not so clear.

There is, however, no doubt that the smell of leather has
a curiously stimulating sexual influence on many men and
women. It is an odor which seems to occupy an intermediate
place between the natural body odors and the artificial perfumes for which it sometimes serves as a basis; possibly it is
to this fact that its occasional sexual influence is owing, for, as
Ave have already seen, there is a tendency for sexual allurement
to attach to odors which are not the specific personal body odors
but yet are related to them. Moll considers, no doubt rightly,
that shoe fetichism, perhaps the most frequent of sexual fetichistic perversions, is greatly favored, if, indeed, it does not owe
its origin to, the associated odor of the feet and of the shoes. 
He narrates a case of shoe fetichism in a man in which the perversion began at the age of 6, when for the first time he wore
new shoes, having previously used only the left-off shoes of his
elder brother; he felt and smelt these new shoes with sensations of unmeasured pleasure; and a few years later began to
use shoes as a method of masturbation. ISTacke has also recorded the case of a shoe fetichist who declared that the sexual
attraction of shoes (usually his wife ' s) lay largely in the odor
of the leather. Krafft-Ebing, again, brings forward a case
of shoe fetichism in which the significant fact is mentioned
that the subject bought a pair of leather cuffs to smell while
masturbating. Eestif de la Bretonne, who was somewhat of a
shoe fetichist, appears to have enjoyed smelling shoes. It is
not probable that the odor of leather explains the whole of
shoe fetichism, — as we shall see when, in another "Study," this
question comes before us — and in many cases it cannot be said 
to enter at all; it is, however, one of the factors. Such a conclusion is further supported by the fact that by many the odor 
of new shoes is sometimes desired as an adjuvant to coitus. It 
is in the experience of prostitutes that such a device is not in- 
frequent. Niieke mentions that a colleague of his was informed 
by a prostitute that several of her clients desired the odor of 
new shoes in the room, and that she was accustomed to obtain 
the desired perfume by holding her shoes for a moment over the 
flame of a spirit lamp.

