The Local Board are restrained by the injunction 
from turning lime water into the river, on the plea 
that it would destroy the fish ; but the experience at 
Leicester shows that this is not a necessary consequence of treating the sewage with lime. There, 
however, the lime water does not enter the river; 
sufficient reservoir space is allowed for its precipitation before the effluent water is discharged. 

Mr. Burns, the local Surveyor of Ely, having, as 
early as 1834, made some successful experiments in 
treating gas water with clay, was induced recently 
to apply it, in conjunction with lime, for deodorizing 
the sewage, on completion of the drainage works of 
Ely. Sewage works have been erected at the outfall 
in which the experiment has been in operation for 
some time, and it is stated with complete success. 
At the time of my visit the place was certainly quite 
free from offensive smell ; but the collecting tank has 
not yet been opened to try the effect of the manure. 

It is found that one ton of clay is sufficient to 
deodorize 600 tons of sewage as at present discharged at Ely ; but, as only a portion of the houses 
have waterclosets as yet, the liquid is comparatively 
weak. It is expected that every house will in the 
course of the present year be connected with the 
sewers, when it is supposed that about double the 
weight of clay will be required for the same quantity 
of sewage. 

As the sewage discharges into the mixing tank A 
(Drawing No. 3.), a stream of clay water falls from a 
cistern B above, and passes with the sewage alternately into one of two reservoirs C below, whence the 
water filters upwards through a layer of charcoal and 
sand, and discharges by the outfall drain to the river. 

It is proposed to pass the solid matter daily into 
the emptying chamber D, and to mix it with dry clay 
powder and peat charcoal, or with fine dry ashes, 
when it will be fit for removal and use as manure. 

The furnace E shewn in the section is intended for 
consuming the foul gases from the sewers, and for 
heating an oven for drying clay and peat for mixing 
with the wet manure. When the drainage works 
will be complete it is proposed to add a series of 
open tanks, with other filters of charcoal and sand, 
through which the effluent water will pass before 
discharge. 

An attempt has been made for some time at Hitchin 
to intercept the solid matter of the sewage in a series 
of reservoirs and open pits at the outfall of the new 
drainage works, without any means of deodorizing, 
or arrangements for precipitating, straining, or filtering. As might be expected, the process has not 
been successful. An action has been decided against 
the Local Board for pollution of the river, which will 
necessitate the adoption of more complete arrangements. 

The gas for lighting the Dartmoor Prison has been 
manufactured for the last five years from the peat 
with which that neighbourhood abounds, and some 
very interesting results are being elicited in the process by Mr. Watts, the Resident Engineer, by whom 
the system was introduced. 

The peat charcoal and the ammoniacal liquor, two 
of the products of the manufacture, are mixed with 
the solid night-soil of the establishment, and with 
bone-dust, to form a solid manure, which is used on 
the neighbouring lands. 

The liquid refuse of the premises is pumped up 
and applied for irrigation, as will be described further 
on. 

It may be useful to mention, with reference to the 
manufacture of peat charcoal, that one cubic yard of 
the dug peat makes about 4^ cwt. of the dried material, and that 5 cwt. of charcoal are produced from 
1 ton of the dried peat. 

As so much disagreement prevails with respect to 
the deodorizing power of peat charcoal, Mr. Blyth 
was instructed to make some experiments on the 
subject, and to determine the comparative value of 
peat charcoal and the ground Boghead coke for this 
purpose. I append Mr. Blyth's report (App.B.) on 
this examination. The results obtained arc of considerable interest. 



It appears that neither of these substances has 
much deodorizing power when mixed with liquid. 
When heated after saturation they both gave off 
offensive effluvia in abundance, but, when spread 
over the surface of offensive matter, the escape of 
all odour was prevented. The experiments show 
that they have no power to separate matters from 
solution, and thus confirm the previous statements of 
Professor Way and Dr. Henderson that the power of 
charcoal to absorb ammonia from the atmosphere 
does not extend to the separation of that gas, or of 
anything worthy of notice, from solution. 
