In the case of Edgar
there was a constitutional condition upon which was grafted a
localized affection of the left lung. This was probably a lobar
broncho-pneumonia in the first instance, like those just described,
with pleurisy, the result of which was a cartilaginous degeneration
of the pleura and a fibroid degeneration of the lung. We may
look upon the fetid cavity, therefore, as consecutive to those fibroid
degenerations, just as in ordinary phthisis a vomica is consecutive
to tuberculization. And I think that when we find such cavities
in a highly fibroid lung, we may reasonably conclude that they are
formed like other ulcerous solutions of continuity of tissues in the
state of fibroid degeneration, and are to he classed with rodent
fibroid ulcers in the skin and cervix uteri or elsewhere. Hence
the cavity is the result of rodent fibroid ulceration. In its lining
pyogenic membrane there is a tissue analogous to that of the
bronchial mucous membrane in cases of chronic bronchitis. Since
the structural disease is constitutional, it is fair to conclude that
the predisposing causes of the peculiar fetid excretion are constitutional, and are linked etiologically with the fibroid change of
tissue. It is a special characteristic of fibroid and cartilaginous
ulcerations to be fetid. This is well shown in ozaena, which is a
deep ulceration of the fibrous and cartilaginous tissues of the nose,
and also in rodent fibroid ulcers in general. The smell of ozaena
is, in fact, very similar to that observed in examples of fetid fibroid
vomicai ; and M. Lasagne correctly remarks the same of the fetor
in fetid bronchitis. Yet it is not otherwise described by observers
in general than as " gangrenous." The characters will doubtless differ in different cases, according to the complications, — in one
there may be dilated bronchi ; in another, a gangrenous cavern ; in
another, blood may be exuded and decompose in tlie cavity
under the same kind of fermentation as that which modifies the pus
and bronchial secretion. The smell might well be termed an ozaena-odour.

The Nature and Origin of the Pulmonary Fetor in Fetid Bronchitis and Bronchorrhoea.

In the last group of cases I have endeavoured to show that the
peculiar fetor is probably similar in origin to ozaena ; but it is not
like that odour in all cases ; nor will the explanation apply to the
fetor of acute and chronic bronchitis, or of bronchorrhoea, or
broncho-pneumonia, for tliere is no proof of a rodent ulcerous cavity
in these. Now, it is to be observed that the odour is sui generis
in them, as compared with other pulmonary fetors, and has therefore its own characters. 
1. In its typical form, according to my experience, when it comes directly from the lung, it is always more
or less faecal. In the first case that I observed, the breath and
sputa rendered a spacious ward odious as a privy, with the stench
of fresh foeces. As to this fact there can be no mistake. Now this
is not the odour of the breath in cases of fetid abscess or ozaena.
2. After the sputa has been exposed to the air for a while, however,
it gives off an odour wholly different. In my first case I could
only liken it to the delicate scent of a decaying apple.- In the
case of Oliver S. (reported by my friend Dr Low of King ' s Lynn,
together with my clinical remarks), the breath and sputa were
noted as of an odour "rather faecal than gangrenous;" while that
of the sputa became like the scent of the apple or hawthorn blossom.

And in the case of C. A., the sputum is correctly described as " of
a muco-purulent character, with a disagreeable faecal odour, which
is most intense when just expectorated, and which, on standing
exposed to the air, becomes changed, — sometimes into a wet-mortar
smell, but more generally into what simulates apple-blossom very
closely."  Now, in these characteristics the odour of fetid bronchitis differs essentially from that of fetid abscess and of true
pulmonary gangrene. In the case of pulmonary gangi-ene with
which I compared my first example of fetid bronchitis, the breath
was so horrible that I was made sick to vomiting when using tlie
stethoscope. It was wholly unlike that of faeces. All writers
speak of this dreadful smeii in true pulmonary gangrene; but
none ever describe it as faecal except Louis. He informed M.
Valleix that he had observed exceptions to this hon-ible putrid
smell in certain cases, in which the odour resembled that of feces,
although after death there was nothing more observed in the lung
than what is usually found. I suspect, however, that these cases
were examples of pyogenic cavities, or dilated bronchi, and not
gangrene ; for it is probable these pyogenic membranes give forth
the same purulent stuff as the bronchial mucous membrane in cases
of fetid bronchitis. Dr EUiotson remarks incidentally, that in
phthisis the expectoration sometimes smells " like fasces." I must
express a doubt, however, that these were cases of tubercular
phthisis, for I have never observed the faecal odour in any such
cases. Although fetid pus is not uncommon, pulmonary fetor,
sui generis, is by no means a common symptom. I found it in
only two of twelve hundred patients of the York County Hospital, and it can only be expected to occur in the rarer forms
of consumption (using the term in its general sense), such as
the rheumatic consumption I have described, and the bronchial or
" pituitous consumption " of Gilchrist, in which there is a copious
purulent expectoration derived solely from the smaller bronchi,
although the lungs themselves are flabby, or emphysematous, or
cedematous.

It follows, from these facts, that there are three distinct kinds of
pulmonary fetor, namely, that of faces, that of ozaena, and that of
gangrene ; and it remains to ascertain how each arises.

The odour of pulmonary gangrene is obviously due to putrescent
decomposition of the dead pulmonary tissue; it is the odour of
putrefaction. Dr Law has expressed the opinion that the blood
previously effused into the lung putrefies. This may be the case when
the lung itself is gangrenous, but blood rarely thus putrefies per se
— perhaps never — without the action of a septic " ferment." It is
well known that putrid meat will quickly induce putrescence in
fresh meat when brought near to it or in contact with it ; and it is
therefore conceivable that the effused blood in cases of pneumonia
and pulmonary apoplexy of a low type may receive a septic
"ferment" from without, and thus the putrid fermentation be set
up in it. Or it is possible that some of the infusorial organisms
wiiich seem to be associated with hospital gangrene and other kinds
of infectious putrescence may take effect on the blood or pulmonary
tissue. In pulmonary mouldiness (the pneumono-mycosis of Vircliow) a parasitic bronchitis seems to result from the irritation of an
aspergillus in the bronchi. These have been found also surrounding the margin of a gangrenous cavity in the lung. The
pulmonary moulds are not unknown to phthisis, and it seems
probable that the sporules may multiply in the bronchi, and be
diffused by the breath of the patient, so as to excite a bronchitis in
those persons who inhale them who have weak lungs. Hence,
perhaps, the widespread belief, that it is not safe to sleep with a
phthisical person, and that phthisis is a dangerously infectious
complaint, as is the opinion in Italy. The putrescent infusoria,
such as the vibrios of hospital gangrene and the bacterides of
carbuncular gangrene, have not, I think, been looked for in cases
of pulmonary gangrene. The bacterides may, however, be a cause
of those kinds in wliich the gangrenous cavity has no contact with
the external air and there is no fetor, inasmuch as they are abundantly present in the blood in carbuncular gangrene, and which
sometimes affects the lungs.

Since Laennec first mooted the opinion, the ozena-odour in
certain forms of bronchorrhoea and bronchitis has been attributed
by several observers to a putrescence of the bronchial excretions.
Granting this, the inquiry naturally follows, why they become putrescent in tlie particular class of cases described, amongst the many
thousands who suffer from puralent bronchial secretion ? Besides,
the odour evolved is not at all like that of the fetid pus expectorated in cases of empyema, in which the cavity communicates with a
bronchus, so that if the purulent bronchial excretion do undergo
change, there must be something in its composition in these cases
of a special character. That it does undergo decomposition seems
certain ; but it does not follow that the change is putrefaction. In
ozaena from ulceration of the nasal cartilages, and in rodent fibroid
ulcers, there is a most offensive discharge, but the odour is not like
the smell of decomposing pus from ordinary ulcers. The pus of
fibroid pyogenic cavities and of fetid bronchitis undergoes a similar
change. We are therefore led to the conclusion that in all these
cases there is some special constituent of the morbid products which
either undergoes its own peculiar decomposition or acts as a ferment
in exciting such in the other constituents. I do not think we need
go beyond observed facts for instances as to this point. In so far
as anatomical changes have been observed in these fetid pulmonary
diseases, they are manifestly those of fibrinous exudation and
degeneration, — are, in short, those which are observed in acute and
chronic tissue-changes of rheumatic origin. Now, we know that
in such changes lactic acid plays an important part, either as a
cause if we adopt the conclusions of Dr B. W. Richardson and
others, or as a result of the morbid tissue-metamorphosis, if the
ordinary theory be objected to. And it seems farther probable,
according to the physiological chemists, that it is decomposed in
the lungs, under ordinary circumstances, into carbonic acid and
water. If, then, we suppose that there is an excess of lactic acid
in the pulmonary excretions in these cases, or of some other acid of
the class, or that the ordinary series of decompositions is interrupted
and other products result in virtue of vital changes, an irritant is
brought into direct contact with the bronchial mucous membrane.
If this be sufficiently powerful, the same consequences will follow
as with other powerful irritants (such as the vapours of iodine or
chlorine), and tlius a bronchitis with a copious muco-purulent discharge be excited. How easily lactic acid or acids or the lactates
may be transformed within the capillary bronchi and air-cells, or
elsewhere, wherever a suitable ferment is introduced or produced, is
shown by the fact that when lactates are left in contact with putrefying matter, at a temperature of 86° to 95°, butyric acid is formed.

That a rheumatic condition is an important element in these cases
is shown by collateral evidence, although the morbid product need
not necessarily be lactic acid, and certainly is not in all cases of
pulmonary fetor. It is incidentally mentioned that in Dr Haldane ' s
case tube-casts of the smaller bronchi were at first mistaken for
disintegrating lung-tissue. Now these cases of " plastic bronchitis "
run a course almost identical with that of cases of fetid bronchopneumonia. There is the same frequency of haemorrhage, violent
cough, and other important symptoms, occun-ing in paroxysms,
lasting for a week or two, but sometimes for several weeks, with the
same tendency to recur for weeks or years. They also end in a
very similar manner, either in a form of phthisis or in a dangerous
pulmonary complication, and they are about equally rare. In
short, substitute for expectoration of plastic tube-casts a fetid mucopurulent expectoration, and the diseases would be identical, — so
that the constitutional conditions are apparently the same. The
difiference is as to the susceptibility of the morbid pulmonary excretions and exudations to undergo decomposition. These cases of
plastic bronchitis shade off also into that special kind of lobar bronchopneumonia, closely resembling the fetid kind in symptoms and
course, and occurring in rheumatic subjects, to wliicli I liave already
referred. A case of this kind is now under my care in the Infirmary, in which the seat of lesion is (as is most common) in the
left lung, with persistent pain there, and tingling in the palm of
the left hand. The patient (a man) has had profuse stronglysmelling sweats, like those of the. rheumatic, and rheumatic
corpuscles in his urine.

Fetor of the breath closely resembling that under consideration
is observed in pregnancy, scorbutus, and cachectic states of a rheumatic character ; in all these the blood is highly fibrinous and
embolism not uncommon. Since the pulmonary artery has been
found plugged in cases of pulmonary gangrene and rodent pulmonary ulcer simulating it, tlie plugging has been usually considered as the cause of the morbid change. There seems to be,
however, just as solid ground for the opposite theory, namely, that
the plugging is caused by the pulmonary disease. But, however
caused, the excess of fibrin is probably a predisposing or exciting
cause of the fetor.

These remarks refer chiefly to cases of pulmonary fetor in which
changes of structure have been observed. But in one class of
these affections there is no cognisable disease, and yet a very
characteristic odour (the faecal) is exhaled. But these cases, when
examined, only serve to show more clearly its rheumatic origin.
In offensive perspiration of the feet a peculiar cabbage-like stench
is given off. It has been roundly asserted that this is due simply
to want of cleanliness, just as the stench of fetid bronchitis has
been attributed to gangrene ; but the theory is certainly not sound.
Cases occur in which the most scrupulous cleanliness fails to prevent
the smell. Indeed, I know no more intractable malady, for even when
the stockings and shoes are changed two or three times a-day and
powerful scents used, the morbid stench is still diffused. It seems
probable that the perspiration contains an element which undergoes
decomposition at a low temperature or on exposure to the air. I
have been informed that a surgeon in extensive practice in the
north of England committed suicide a few years ago because of
this offensive malady. A patient soon infects the air of a large
room. In the cases that have come under my observation I could
trace distinctly a rheumatic habit, and sometimes rheumatism was
a complication. Allied to this is the offensive odour in some
forms of rheumatic fever and in cases of acute recuiTcnt attacks
of leprous inflammation of the skin, in which the paroxysm terminates by a copious plastic exudation into the cutaneous cellular tissue.
The urine sometimes becomes fetid in like manner. Dr Low, of
King ' s Lynn, had communicated to me the particulars of a case of
this kind in a pregnant female, and which ceased with delivery.

Speculations have naturally arisen as to the immediate origin
and composition of the volatile matter which causes the stench;
and as the blood is easily impregnated with volatile stuff, it is
readily concluded that it comes from the blood. Perhaps it may
be so as to some ; but I think it equally probable as to others,
that they first become what we find them on exposure to the air in
the lungs at a blood-heat, or on the surface of the body, as in cases
of fetid perspiration. The change in smell which the fetid sputa
undergo on exposure to the air shows how easily decomposition
takes place. Possibly the faecal odour may be an excretion, but if
it were so in my first observed case, it did not originate in any
so-called metastasis, for I noted the state of the faeces as to odour
and observed no change. Pus from abscesses in the abdominal
parietes has been found to be highly faecal in smell, although the
most careful examination failed to detect any connexion between
the abscess and the intestines. I have no doubt that sulphur is
a predominant, albeit not exclusive constituent of these fetid volatile changes. The odour itself is a sufficient proof, independently
of distillations of sputa at a temperature of 230° Fahr. ; and I may
add that ordinary pulmonary vapour itself, if collected and kept
a while, quickly becomes fetid, and even the condensed vapours on
the windows of rooms crowded with people smells offensively
although the highest temperature cannot exceed 90°. Dr Gamgee
has, however, demonstrated, what was already plain enough to all
acquainted with the facts, that we can get stinks from any pulmonary excretion whatever, if we subject them to the same chemical torments of distillation, acidification, neutralization, redistillation, and the like. This fact is no ground, however, for the
conclusions, that there is nothing special in the odour of fetid bronchitis or its causes, and that we must abandon that term as perplexing, unscientific, and unphilosophical, for the more correct
phrase " bronchitis with fetid expectoration." I have, however,
subjoined reports of the chemical analysis of the sputum in two
cases under my care.

