OLEUM AMYGDALJE. Almond Oil.

The oil expressed from the bitter or sweet almond.

Thin, pale yellow, nearly inodorous, with a bland oleaginous
nutty taste.

Used in preparing Oleum Phosphoratum, Unguenhim Cetacei,
Uncjuentum Ilesince, and Unguenhm, Simplex, and the preparations containing it.

OLEUM ANETHI. Oil of Dill.

The oil distilled in Britain from dill fruit.

Colour pale yellow, odour pungent, taste hot and sweetish.
OLEUM ANISI. Oil of Anise.

The oil distilled in Europe from anise fruit ; or in China from
star-anise fruit.

Colourless or very pale yellow ; with the odour of the fruit,
and an aromatic sweetish taste. The ordinary oil of anise
congeals at temperatures between 50° and 60° Fahr. (10° to
15.5° C), and may remain solid at 62° or 63° Fahr. (16.7° to
17.2° C.) ; oil of star-anise only becomes solid at a few degrees
above the freezing-point of water.

Used in preparing Essentia Anisi, Tinctura Camphorae Composita, and Tinctura Opii Ammoniata.

OLEUM ANTHEMIDIS. Oil of Chamomile.

The oil distilled in Britain from chamomile flowers.

Pale blue or greenish-blue, but gradually becoming yellowish brown ; with the peculiar aromatic taste and odour of the
flowers.

Used in preparing Extractum Anthemidis.
OLEUM CAJUPUTI. Oil of Cajupnt. Nat. Ord., Mtrtaceae.

The oil distilled from the leaves of Melaleuca minor.

A transparent limpid very volatile pale bluish-green liquid,
with a strong penetrating agreeable camphoraceous odour, and a
warm bitterish aromatic camphoraceous taste succeeded by a
sensation of coldness in the mouth.

Used in preparing Linimentum Crotonis and Spiritus
Cajuputi.

Powerful stimulant and antispasmodic.




OLEUM CARTUI. Oil of Caraway.

The oil distilled in Britain from caraway fruit.

Colourless or pale yellow when recent, but gradually becoming
darker, with the odour of the fruit, and a spicy somewhat acrid
taste.

Used in preparing Confectio Scammonii and Pilula Aloes
Barbadensis.

OLEUM CARYOPHYLLI. Oil of Cloves.

The oil distilled in Britain from cloves.

Colourless or pale yellow when recent, but gradually becoming
reddish-brown, having in a high degree the odour and taste of
cloves. Sinks in water.

Used in preparing Confectio Scammonii, Pilula Colocynthidis Composita, and Pilula Colocynthidis et Hyoscyami.

OLEUM CINNAMOMI. Oil of Cinnamon.

The oil distilled from cinnamon bark.

Yellowish when recent, but gradually becoming cherry-red,
having the odour and taste of cinnamon bark. Sinks in water.
Used in preparing Spiritus Cinnamomi.

Dose. — Of all the above oils, and of many following, 1 to 4
minims.

OLEUM COPAIBS. Oil of Copaiva.

The oil distilled from copaiva.

Colourless or pale yellow, with the odour and taste of copaiva.

Dose. — 5 to 20 minims.
OLEUM CORIANDRI. Oil of Coriander.

The oil distilled in Britain from coriander fruit.

Pale yellow or colourless, having the odour of the fruit and a
mild aromatic taste.

Used in preparing Syrupus Sennae.
OLEUM CROTONIS. Croton Oil. Nat. Ord., Euphorbiaceae.

The oil expressed in Britain from the seeds of Croton Tiglium.

Brownish-yellow to dark reddish-brown, fluorescent, with a
viscid consistence which is increased by age, a faint, peculiar,
somewhat rancid, disagreeable odour, and an oily acrid taste.
Entirely soluble in alcohol. Contains Crotonic Acid.

Used in preparing Liniment um Crotonis.

Powerful irritant, drastic purgative.

Dose. — 1/3 to 1 minim, placed on the tongue, or in pill with
crumb of bread.

OLEUM CUBEBAE. Oil of Cubebs. Nat. Ord., Piperacej:.
The oil distilled in Britain from cubebs.

Colourless or greenish-yellow, with the odour and taste of
cubebs. Contains Cubebin.



Stimulant to mucous membranes ; given in gonorrhoea and
obstinate sneezing.

Dose. — 5 to 20 minims.
OLEUM EUCALYPTI. Oil of Eucalyptus.

Nat. Ord., Myrtaceae.
The oil distilled from the fresh leaves of Eucalyptus Globulus,
Eucalyptus amygdalina, and probably some other species of
Eucalyptus.

Colourless or pale straw-coloured, becoming darker and
thicker by exposure. It has an aromatic odour, and a spicy and
pungent flavour, leaving a sensation of coldness in the mouth.

Used in preparing Ungnentuin Eucalypti.

Possesses powerful ozonizing and anti-malarial influence ;
destructive to low organic growths, but not caustic to the skin.
OLEUM JUNIPEHI. Oil of Juniper. Nat. Ord., Coniferae.

The oil distilled in Britain from the full-grown unripe green
fruit of Juniperus communis.

Colourless or pale greenish-yellow, with the characteristic
odour of the fruit, and a warm aromatic taste.

Used in preparing Spiritius Juniperi.

Stimulant and diuretic.
OLEUM LAVANDULA. Oil of Lavender. Nat. Ord., Labiate.

The oil distilled in Britain from the flowers of Lavandula vera.

Pale yellow or nearly colourless, with the very fragrant odour
of the flowers, and a hot bitter aromatic taste.

Used in preparing Linimentum Camphorae Compositum
Spiritus Lavandulae, and Tinctura Lavandulae Composita.

Stimulant carminative ; given as an adjunct to purgatives
to relieve flatulence.
OLEUM LIMONIS. Oil of Lemon.

A volatile oil obtained by mechanical means from fresh lemon
peel.

Pale yellow, with a very fragrant odour and a warm bitterish
aromatic taste.

Used in preparing Linimentum Patassii Iodidi cum Sapone
and Spirit Ammoniae Aromaticus.
OLEUM LINL Linseed Oil.

The oil expressed in Britain without heat from linseed.

Viscid, yellow, with a faint odour, and bland oleaginous
taste. It gradually thickens by exposure to the air.
OLEUM MENTHAE PIPERITA. Oil of Peppermint.

Nat. Ord., Labiatae.

The oil distilled in Britain from fresh flowering peppermint,
Mentha piperita.





Colourless, pale yellow, or greenish-yellow when recent, but
becoming gradually thicker and reddish by age, with the odour
of peppermint, and a strong penetrating aromatic taste, followed
by a sensation of coldness in the mouth.

Contains Menthene and Menthol.

Used in preparing Aqua Methae Piperitae, Essentia Menthae
Piperitae, Pilula Rhei Composita, Spiritus Menthae Piperitae,
and Tinctura Chloroformi et Morphinae.

Stimulant carminative ; adjunct to purgatives to relieve
flatulence.

OLEUM MENTHA VIRIDIS. Oil of Spearmint.

Nat. Ord., Labiatee.
The oil distilled in Britain from fresh flowering spearmint,
Mentha viridis.

Colourless, pale yellow, or greenish-yellow Vv^hen recent,
but becoming reddish by age, with the odour and taste of the
herb.

Used in preparing Aqua Menthae Viridis.
Given to disguise the taste of nauseous drugs.


OLEUM OLIVAE. Olive Oil. Nat. Ord., Oleacacea.

The oil expressed from the ripe fruit of Olea europsea.

Pale yellow or greenish-yellow, with a very faint agreeable
odour and a bland oleaginous taste ; congeals partially at about
Fahr. (2.2° C).

Contains Olein (liquid) and Margarine (solid).

Used in preparing Charta Epispastica, Cataplasma Lint,
Enema Magaesii Sulphatis, and some plasters, liniments, and
ointments.

OLEUM PHOSPHOEATUM. Phospliorated Oil.

Prepared from Phosphorus and Oil of Almonds heated to
180" Fahr. (82-2° C).

A clear straw-coloured oil ; phosphorescent in the dark. It
contains about one per cent, of phosphorus.

Given in neuralgia and nervous depression.

Dose. — 5 to 10 minims.
OLEUM PIMENTJE. Oil of Pimento.

The oil distilled in Britain from Pimento.

Colourless or slightly yellowish-red when recent, but becoming
brown by age, having the odour and taste of pimento. Sinks in
water.

