Love in insects seeks similar expression to fear, and secretions, it is to be believed, furnish suitable means of intercourse,
especially in fragrance-loving creatures like butterflies. Quite
lately Dr. Fritz Muller, who is prosecuting entomological
research in the virgin forests of Brazil, stated that he was
brought to consider as sexual organs for the diffusion of odours
the various pencils, tufts and manes of hair, and the chalky,
silky, or velvety spots of peculiar scales, as well as the recurved
margin or other pouches enclosing pale buff or white down,
which distinguish the wings of many of the brilliant exotic
male butterflies. And in a general way this assumption is by
no means improbable ; for although instances occur where these
insignia appear in the opposite sex in measure, and, as evolutionists would state it, acquired by the males, they have been transmitted in the lapse of time to their consorts, yet otherwise, in a
majority of cases, they seem truly masculine. In the Papilionidae,
for instance, the front wings of the males have sometimes an
oval chalky spot on their under side, opposite to which there is
a dark brownish spot on the upper side of the hind wings, both
spots emitting a strong disagreeable odour. At other times, the
scent spot on the fore wings is replaced by a brush of hair, and
that on the hind wing is chalky and fragrant of musk, as may
be seen in the common canary-coloured butterflies of the tropics,
Callidryas. Here likewise the females show on either side of
their anal organs a shining spot odoriferous of a volatile acid.
A third example we may find in the male of our English
Clouded Yellows, where the chalky spot is seen without the
brush, the pot of rose-water without the sprinkler. In other
genera certain “ plumules/ '  or club-shaped scales, fringed with
fine hair, have been accused of possessing scent properties. Our
small White Butterfly, belonging to one of these, has a male,
according to Kirby, redolent of thyme, and with some of his
exotic fraternity the scent is described by Dr. Muller as
delicious; but in such cases a caution, as Professor Westwood
has noticed, is doubtless needful, for may not these bright
beings that bathe in sunlight and vapoury distillations the livelong day, gather odour as they fly about. We have many moths,
likewise, with raised scales on the wing-surface, but I am not
aware this is the source of scent attraction. Lastly, organs of
perfume are said to exist in the sub-family of the Swallow Tails
along the anal margin of the hind wings of the males, which is
then recurved. They are evinced by a tuft of hair with a
disagreeable odour.

In the Nymphalidae, or great group of butterflies with rudimentary forelegs, we find some of the common cosmopolitan
Dana ' inse have dactylate hollow processes at the abdominal
extremity, which are furnished with hairs, and on protrusion
emit a disagreeable odour ; and sexual pouches, possibly in
connection, exist on the first median nervure of the hind wing in a
few species ; both being seen in the tawny Danais, that extends
its range to Southern Europe. Others of the Ithonia group
have a tuft of long hair near the anterior margin of the hind
wings, sometimes common to the sexes, and flavouring of vanilla,
while the males have a brown spot covered by the tuft. The
spot and brush of the Yellow Callidryas are reproduced in one of
the Satyrinse, and in some of the Nymphalinse ; while in the
male of the blue Ageronia Arethusa a rather strong odour is
emitted by two large brown spots, situated between the wings,
which appear absent in others of this musical genus. The
gdorious blue satin Morphos, the pride of Brazilian forest trees,
have protrusible hemispherical anal appendages, which sometimes are odoriferous of vanilla ; and in the Brassolinse, another
bulky South American progeny, pencils of erectile hairs or spots
of scales are present. So, too, the peculiar long-winged ITeliconinse of the glades have scent organs in the male, situated
between the anal valves, and in the female these are placed on
the dorsal side of the abdominal extremity; but some have also
a scent-brush, if conclusion may be drawn from a figure in the
volume on “ Foreign Butterflies,” belonging to the Naturalist ' s
Library series.

But Didonis Biblis , according to Dr. Muller, is, so far as odours
are concerned, the most interesting of all these fairy-formed and
many-coloured things of the tropical bush. On seizing one of
these butterflies of either sex, it pushes from between the fourth
and fifth segment of the abdomen two hemispherical protuberances producing a disagreeable odour; and the male has a
second pair between the fifth and sixth segments of the
abdomen, while a different musk-like odour is produced by a
black spot beneath the front wings. In the tailed Hair Streaks
the sexual spot that may be seen on the disc of the front wings
of the female of our green sort, is said to be odorous; and if
so, this is a singular instance of a scent secretion supplanting
a fixed wing colour.

The Skipper Butterflies, diurnal over our northern hills and
woodland, amid the scorching tropical glare are known as
evening visitors, stealing mysteriously to hang at the garden
lupins in purple dusk, before a reflex light has awoke a second

and chaotic dawn. They neither in colour as a rule bear the
burnish and talismanic impress of the sunlight, or in form do
they attain the feathery etherealness of the day fliers; their
antennae and various organs seem fairly heavy and moth-like,
and moth-like also are the expansile scent pencils of hair that
garnish the hind tibiae of the legs of many of the males.

Passing to the Burnet kind, a like incarnation of the union of
night and day, the males of exotic Glaucopidae have two long
retractable filaments, generally beset with hairs, on the ventral
side of the abdomen, sometimes emitting a strong odour.
Bristling scent pencils, however, are most characteristic of the
moths, and these usually distinguish the males, although, being
commonly retained in their pouches, their presence is little suspected until they have been pricked out with a needle-point ;
but in the twilight Sphinges, especially quick of nerve, they are
sometimes found present in both sexes, and sharp fear, as we
touch or grasp the ilower-hoverer reposing in diurnal lethargy,
will cause their momentary expansion. Thus when the male
Death ' s-Head Moth is on the point of Squeaking in our fingers,
as its abdomen inflates, a sessile pencil of yellow hair starts from
a fold between the dorsal and ventral arcs at the base (Plate V.,
Fig. 7b), expanding to a stellate form with swift whirling
motion, like a trundled mop (Fig. 7a) ; and immediately there
arises an oily volatile effluvia, resembling the scent of jessamines,
but soon becoming nauseous. This fluid aroma, secreted near
the insertion of the “ fans," and traversing by capillary attraction
to their extremity, stains them bright orange at the glands,
shaded into yellow at their tip. Similar “fans" in the Convolvulus Hawk convey the sensation of amber or musk, and their
anatomy has been investigated by Prof. Targioni, who describes
the hyperdomal tissue opposite the insertion of the “ fans " as
composed of hexagonally nucleated pyriform cells, from each
of which proceeds a tube to the base of the several hairs of the
fascicle, which are inserted by means of a process; so that the
unicellular glandules secrete the odoriferous matter, and the
hairs become their excretory ducts. These “fans " are likewise
said to exist in the male Privet Hawk Moth, and may characterise the genus Sphinx.

