At end whereof is placed a costly portall:
Resembling much the figure of a drumme,
Granting slow entrance to a priuate closet:
Where daily with a mallet in my hand,
I set and frame all words and sounds that come,
Vpon an Anuile and so make them fit:
For the pere: vinckling poore; that winding leades,
From my close chamber to your Lordships cell.
Thither do I chiefe Iustice of all accents,
Psyches next porter, Microcosmes front:
Learnings ritch treasure, bring discipline,
Reasons discourse, knowledge of foraigne states,
Lowd fame of great Heroes vertuous deeds:
The marrowe of graue speeches and the flowers:
Of quickest Wits, neat Iests, and pure Conceits,
And often times to ease the heauy burthen,
Of gouernment, your Lordships shoulder beare,
I thither do conduce the pleasing Nuptialls:
Of sweetest iustruments with heauenly noise.
If then A•ditus, haue deseru ' d the best:
Let him be dignified before the rest.
COM. SEN.
Auditus I am almost a Skepticke in this matter,
scarce knowing which way the ballance of the cause will decline,
when I haue heard the rest, I will dispatch iudgement, meane
while you may depart.

Auditus leads his showe about the stage, and then goes out.
ACTVS. 4. SCENA. 3.
COMMVNIS SENSVS, Memoria, Phantastes, Anamnestes, Heuresis as before, Olfactus in a garland of seuerall flowers, a page before him, bearing his target, his field vert, around argent, two Boyes with casting bottells, and two with censors with incense, another with a veluet cushion stuck with slowers, an other with a basket of hearbes, an other with a box of Oyntment, Olfactus leads them about, and making obeysance presents them before the bench.
I. BOY.
Your onely way to make a good pomander, is this,
take an ownce of the purest garden mould, clensed and steeped
seauen daies in change of motherlesse rose water, then
take the best Labdanum, Benioine, both Storaxes, amber
greece, and Ciuet, and mus ke, incorporate them together, and
work them into what forme you please, this if your breath bee
not to valiant, will make you smell as sweete as my Ladies
dogge.

PHA.
This Boy it should seeme represents Odor, hee is so
perfect a persumer.

ODOR.
I do my Lord, and haue at my command,
The smell of flowers, and Odoriferous drugs,
Of oyntments sweete, and excellent perfumes,
And Court-like waters, which if once you smell,
You in your heart would wish as I suppose:
That all your Body were transsformed to Nose.
PHA.
Olfactus of all the Senses, your obiects haue the worst
luck, they are alwaies iarring with their contraries, for none
can weare Ciuet, but they are suspected of a proper badde
sent, where the prouerbe springs, hee smelleth best, that doth of
nothing smell.

ACT. 4. SCENA 4.
The bench and Olfactus as before, Tobacco apparelled in a taffata mantle, his armes browne and naked, buskins made of the pilling of Osiers, his necke bare, hung with Indian leanes, his face browne painted with blewe stripes, in his nose swines teeth, on his head a painted wicker crowne, with Tobacco pipes set in it, •lumes of Tobacco leaues, lead by two Indian boyes naked, with tapers in their hands, Tobacco boxes and pipes lighted.
PHA.
Foh, foh, what a smell is heare? is this one of your delightfull
obiects?

OLF.
It is your onely sent in request Sir.

COM. SEN.
What fiery fellow is that, which smokes so
much in the mouth?

OLF.
It is the great and puissant God of Tobacco.

TOB.
Ladoch guevarroh pusuer shelvar baggon,
Olfia di quanon, Indi cortilo uraggon.

PHA.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, this in my opinion is the tongue of the Antipodes.

MEM,
No I remember it very well, it was the language the
Arcadians spake, that siued long before the Moon.
COM. SEN.
What signifies it Olfactus?
OLF.
This is the mighty Emperour Tobacco, King of Trinidado,
that in being conquered, conquered all Europe, in making
them pay tribute for their smoake.

TOB.
Erfronge inglues conde hifinge,
Develin floscoth ma pu cocthinge.
OLF.
Expeller of Catarhes, banisher of all agues, your guts
onely salue for the green wounds of a non plus.

TOB.

Alvulcam vercu, I parda poraside gratam, kafamala
mara, che Bau•o respartera, quirara?

OLF.
Sonne to the God Vulcan, and Tellus, kinne to the father
of Myrth, called Bacchiu?

TOB.
Viscardonok, pillostuphe, pascano •inaromagas,
Pagidagon stollisinfe, carociba•o scribas.
OLF.
Genius of all Swaggerers, profest enemy to Physitions,
sweete ointment for sowre teeth, firme knot of good fellowship,
Adamant of Company, switt winde, to spred the
wings of Time, hated of none, but those that know him not,
and of so great deserts, that who so is acquainted with him,
can hardly forsake him.

PHA.
It seemes these last words were very significant, I
promise you a God of great denomination, he may be my Lord
Tappes for his large Titles.

COM. SEN.
But forward Olfactus, as they haue done before
you, with your discription

OLF.
lust in the mid ' st of Cephalons round face
As  ' twere a frontis-spice vnto the hill,
Olfactus lodging built in figure long,
Doubly dis-parted with two precious vaults,
The rootes whereof most richly are inclos ' d,
With Orient Pearles, and sparkling Diamonds:
Beset at the end with Emerauds and Turchois,
And Rubies red, and flaming Crisolits,
At vpper end whereof in costly manner,
I lay my head betweene two spungeous pillowes,
Like faire Adonis twixt the paps of Venus,
Where I conducting in and out the wind,
Daily examine all the ayre inspir ' d.
By my pure searching, if it be pure,
And sit to serue the lungs with liuely breath:
Hence do I likewise minister perfume
Vnto the neighbour brayne, perfumes of force
To clense your head, and make your fantasie
To refine wit, and sharpe inuention
And strengthen memory, from whence it came,
That old deuotion, incence did ordaine
To make mans spirits more apt for things diuine,
Besides a thousand more commodities,
In leiw whereof your Lordships I request,
Giue me the crowne if I deserue it best.
Olfactus leades his company about the Stage, and goes out.
