Spanish Mackril are in shape and colour like our Mackril, but larger: They are three Foot or three and half long, and nine or ten Inches about, and they also are generally esteemed very excellent Fish.

The Ray is a flat Fish, like Skate, and I have seen three sorts of them; viz. the Stingray, the Raspray and the Whipray. The Stingray and Rasp|ray are much a like in shape; but the former has three or four strong sharp Prickles, near two Inches long, at the Root of its Tail, which are said to be very venomous, but the rest of his Skin is smooth. The Raspray has a rough knotty Skin wherewith Rasps are made: the Skins of the largest are so rough, that the Spaniards in some Places grate their Cassavy with them, which is a Root very common all over the West-Indies; and of which the Spaniards and English frequently make their Bread; but the fairest Skins are used to cover Surgeons Instrument Cases, and other such fine Things; but of late they are counterfeited. I have been told that in Turkey Asses Skins are stamped with small hard Seeds, which gives them Impressions like Raspray.

The Whipray differs from the other two sorts, having a small, but longer Tail, and ending with a Knob, shaped like a Harpoon. All these three sorts are much about a Foot and half broad. There is yet another sort of these flat Fish of the Whipray kind, but of a prodigious bigness; viz. three or four Yards square, and their Tails as long: these we call Sea-Devils; they are very strong Fish, and are sometimes Gamesom; but they make an odd Figure when they leap out of the Water, tumbling over and over.

Neither are Turtle and Manatee wanting in this Lagune. Here are some Hawks-bill-Turtle, but the green Turtle is most plentiful. They are of a middle size; yet here was once a very large one taken, as I have mentioned in my Voyages round the World.

Here are abundance of Manatee, which are both large and sweet.


Alligators are also in great numbers in all the Creeks, Rivers and Lagunes in the Bay of Campeachy; and I think that no part of the Universe is better stock ' d with them.

The Alligator is a Creature so well known every where, that I should not describe it, were it not to give an Account of the difference between it and the Crocodile; for they resemble each other so nearly in their shape and bulk, as also in their Natures, that they are generally mistaken for the same Species; only the one supposed to be the Male, the other the Female: Whether they are so or not, the World may judge by the following Observations. As to their Bulk and length, I never saw any so large as some I have heard and read of; but accor|ding to my best Judgment, though I have seen Thousands, I never met with any above sixteen or seventeen Foot long, and as thick as a large Colt. He his shaped like a Lizard, of a dark brown colour, with a large head and very long Jaws, with great strong Teeth, especially two of a Remarkable Length, that grow out of, and at the very end of the under Jaw in the smallest part, on each side one; there are two holes in the upper Jaw to receive these, otherways he could not shut his Mouth. It has 4 short Legs and Broad Claws, with a long Tail. The Head, Back and Tail is fenced with pretty hard Scales, joyned together with a very thick tough Skin: Over its Eyes there are two hard scally Knobs, as big as a Mans Fist, and from the Head to the Tail, along the Ridge of his Back  ' tis full of such knotty hard Scales, not like Fish-Scales, which are loose, but so united to the Skin, that it is all one with it, and can ' t be taken asunder, but with a sharp Knife. From the Ridge of the Back down on the Ribs towards the Belly, (which is of a dusky yellow colour like a Frog) there are many of these Scales, but not so substantial nor so thick placed as the other.

These Scales are no hindrance to him in turning; for he will turn very quick, considering his length. When he goes on Land his Tail drags on the Ground.

The Flesh  smells very strong of Musk; especially four Kernels or Cods that are always found about them, two of which grow in the Groin, near each Thigh; the other two at the Breast, one under each Fore-leg, and about the bigness of a Pullets Egg; therefore when we kill an Alligator, we take out these, and having dried them wear them in our Hats for a perfume. The Flesh is seldom eaten but in case of Necessity, because of it strong scent.

Now the Crocodile hath none of these Kernels, neither doth his Flesh taste at all Musky, therefore esteemed better Food. He is of a yellow colour, neither hath he such long Teeth in his under Jaw. The Crocodile ' s Legs also are longer, and when it runs on Land, it bears its Tail above the Ground, and turns up the tip of it in a round bow, and the Knots on the back are much thicker, higher and firmer than those of the Alligator; and differ also as to the Places where they are found. For in some Parts, as here in the Bay of Campeachy, are abundance of Alligators, where yet I never saw nor heard of any Crocodiles. At the Isle Grand Caymanes, there are Crocodiles, but no Alligators. At Pines by Cuba, there are abundance of Crocodiles, but I cannot say there are no Alligators, tho '  I never saw any there. Both Kinds are called Caymanes, by the Spaniards; therefore probably they may reckon them for the same. And I know of no other difference, for they both lay Eggs alike, which are not distinguishable to the Eye: They are as big as a Goose-Egg, but much longer, and good Meat; yet the Alligators Eggs taste very musky: They prey both alike in either Element,

for they love Flesh as well as Fish, and will live in either fresh or salt Water. Beside these Creatures, I know none that can live any where, or upon any sort of Food, like them.  ' Tis reported, that they love Dogs Flesh better than any other Flesh what|soever. This I have seen with my own Eyes, that our Dogs were so much afraid of them, that they would not very willingly drink at any great River or Creek where those Creatures might lurk and hide themselves, unless they were (through Necessity) constrained to it; and then they would stand five or six Foot from the brink of the Creek or River, and bark a considerable time before they would Adventure nearer; and then even at the sight of their own Shadows in the Water, they would again retire to the Place from whence they came, and bark vehemently a long time; so that in the dry Season, when there was no fresh Water but in Ponds and Creeks, we used to fetch it our selves and give it our Dogs; and many times in our Hunting, when we came to a large Creek that we were to pass through, our Dogs would not follow us; so that we often took them in our Arms, and carried them over.

Besides the fore-mentioned difference between the Alligator and Crocodile; the latter is accounted more fierce and daring then the Alligator: There|fore when we go to the Isles of Pines or Grand Caymanes to hunt, we are often molested by them, especially in the Night. But in the Bay of Cam|peachy, where there are only Alligators, I did never know any Mischief done by them, except by accident Men run themselves into their Jaws. I remember one Instance of this Nature, which is as follows.


In the very height of the dry time seven or eight Men (English and Irish) went to a place called Pies Pond, on Beef-Island, to hunt. This Pond was never dry, so that the Cattle drew hither in swarms, but after two or three days hunting they were shy, and would not come to the Pond till Night, and then if an Army of Men had lain to oppose them, they would not have been debarr ' d of Water. The Hunters knowing their Custom, lay still all Day, and in the Night visited this Pond, and killed as many Beefs as they could. This Trade they had driven a Week, and made great profit. At length an Irish-man going to the Pond in the Night, stumbled over an Alligator that lay in the Path: The Alligator seized him by the Knee; at which the Man cries out, Help! help! His Consorts not know|ing what the matter was, ran all away from their Huts, supposing that he was fallen into the Clutches of some Spaniards, of whom they were afraid every dry Season. But poor Daniel not finding any assistance, waited till the Beast opened his Jaw to take better hold; because it is usual for the Alligator to do so; and then snatch ' d away his Knee, and slipt the But-end of his Gun in the room of it, which the Alligator griped so hard, that he pull ' d it out of his Hand and so went away. The Man being near a small Tree climb ' d up out of his reach; and then cried out to his Consorts to come and assist him; who being still within Call, and watching to hear the Issue of the Ala|rum, made haste to him with Fire-brands in their Hands, and brought him away in their Arms to his Hut; for he was in a deplora|ble condition, and not able to stand on his Feet, his Knee was so torn with the Alligators Teeth.


