
Our tyrant having left the ship, and carried his favourite Mackshane along with him, to my inexpressible satisfaction; our new commander came on board, in a ten-oar ' d barge, overshadowed with a vast umbrella, and appeared in every thing quite the reverse of Oakhum, being a tall, thin, young man, dressed in this manner; a white hat garnished with a red feather, adorned his head, from whence his hair flowed down upon his shoulders, in ringlets tied behind with a ribbon. His coat, consisting of pink-coloured silk, lined with white, by the elegance of the cut retired backward, as it were, to discover a white sattin waistcoat embroidered with gold, unbuttoned at the upper part, to display a broch set with garnets, that glittered in the breast of his shirt, which was of the finest cambrick, edged with right mechlin: The knees of his crimson velvet breeches scarce descended so low as to meet his

silk stockings, which rose without spot or wrinkle on his meagre legs, from shoes of blue Meroquin, studded with diamond buckles, that flamed forth rivals to the sun! A steel-hilted sword, inlaid with figures of gold, and decked with a knot of ribbon which fell down in a rich tossle, equipped his side; and an amber-headed cane hung dangling from his wrist: But the most remarkable parts or his furniture were, a mask on his face, and white gloves on his hands, which did not seem to be put on with an intention to be pulled off occasionally, but were fixed with a ring set with a ruby on the little finger of one hand, and by one set with a topaz on that of the other. In this garb, captain Whiffle, for that was his name, took possession of the ship, surrounded with a crowd of attendants, all of whom, in their different degrees, seemed to be of their patron ' s disposition; and the air was so impregnated with perfumes, that one may venture to affirm the clime of Arabia Foelix was not half so sweet scented. My fellow-mate, observing no surgeon among his train, thought he had found an occasion too favourable for himself to be neglected; and remembring the old proverb,

"Spare to speak, and spare to speed,"
resolved to sollicit the new captain ' s interest immediately, before any other surgeon could be appointed for the ship. With this view he repaired to the cabbin, in his ordinary dress, consisting of a check-shirt and trousers, a brown linen waistcoat, and a night-cap of the same, neither very clean, which for his further misfortune, happened to smell strong of tobacco. Entering without any ceremony, into this sacred place, he found captain
Whiffle reposing upon a couch, with a wrapper of fine chintz about his body, and a muslin cape bordered with lace upon his head; and after several low conge ' s, began in this manner: 
"Sir, I hope you will forgive, and excuse, and pardon the presumption of one who has not the honour of being known unto you, but who is, nevertheless, a shentleman porn and pred, and moreover has had misfortunes, Got help me, in the world." 
Here he was interrupted by the captain, who at first sight of him had started up with great amazement at the novelty of the apparition; and having recollected himself, pronounced, with a look and tone signifying disdain, curiosity and surprize,
"Zauns! who art thou?" 
"I am surgeon ' s first first mate on board of this ship (replied Morgan) and I most vehemently desire and beseech you with all submission, to be pleased to condescend and vouchsafe to enquire into my character, and my pehaviour, and my deserts, which, under Got, I hope, will entitle me to the vacancy of surgeon." 
As he proceeded in his speech, he continued advancing towards the captain, whose nostrils were no sooner saluted with the aromatick flavour that exhaled from him; than he cried with great emotion,
"Heaven preserve me! I am suffocated! Fellow, Fellow, away with thee! Curse thee, fellow! get thee gone, I shall be stunk to death!" 
At the noise of his outcries, his servants run into his apartment, and he accosted them thus;
"Villains! cut-throats! traitors! I am betrayed! I am sacrificed! Will you not carry that monster away? or must I be stifled with the
stench of him? oh! oh!" 
With these interjections, he sunk down upon his settee in a fit; his valet de chambre plied him with a smelling-bottle, one footman chased his temples with Hungary water, another sprinkled the floor with spirits of lavender, and a third pushed Morgan out of the cabbin; who coming to the place where I was, sat down with a demure countenance, and, according to his custom, when he received any indignity which he durst not revenge, began to sing a Welch ditty. I guessed he was under some agitation of spirits, and desired to know the cause; but instead of answering me directly, he asked with great emotion, if I thought him a monster and a stinkard?
"A monster and a stinkard (said I, with some surprize) did any body call you so?" 
"Got is my judge (replied he) captain Fifle did call me both; ay, and all the water in the Tawy will not wash it out of my remembrance. I do affirm, and avouch, and maintain, with my soul, and my pody, and my plood, look you, that I have no smells about me, but such as a christian ought to have, except the effluvia of topacco, which is a cephalic, odoriferous, aromatick herb, and he is a son of a mountain-goat who says otherwise. As for my being a monster, let that be as it is; I am as Got was pleased to create me, which, peradventure, is more than I shall aver of him who gave me that title; for I will proclaim it before the world, that he is disguised, and transfigured, and transmographied with affectation and whimsies; and that he is more like a papoon than one of the human race."
Captain Whiffle sends for me his situation described his surgeon arrives, prescribes for him, and puts him to bed a bed is put up for Mr. Simper contiguous to the stateroom, which, with other parts of the captain ' s behaviour, gives the ship ' s company a very unfavourable idea of their commander I am detained in the West-Indies, by the admiral, and go on board of the Lizard sloop of war, in quality of surgeon ' s mate, where I make myself known to the Surgeon, who treats me very kindly I go on shore, sell my ticket, purchase necessaries, and at my return on board, am surprized at the sight of Crampley, who is appointed lieutenant of the sloop we sail on a cruize take a prize, in which I arrive at Port Morant, under the command of my mess mate, with whom I live in great harmony.

HE was going on, with an elogium upon the captain, when I received a message to clean myself, and go up to the great cabbin, which I immediately performed, sweetening myself with rose-water from the medicine-chest. When I entered the room, I was ordered to stand by

the door, until captain Whiffle had reconnoitred me at a distance, with a spy-glass, who having consulted one sense in this manner, bid me advance gradually, that his nose might have intelligence, before it could be much offended: I therefore approached with great caution and success, and he was pleased to say,

"Ay, this creature is tolerable." 
I found him lolling on his couch with a languishing air, his head supported by his valet de chambre, who from time to time applied a ? smelling ? -bottle to his nose.
"Vergette, (said he, in a squeaking tone) dost thou think this wretch (meaning me) will do me no injury? may I venture to submit my arm to him?" 
"Pon my vord, (replied the valet) I do tink dat dere be great occasion for your honour losing one small quantite of blodt; and the yong mun ave qulque chose of de bonne mine.
"Well then (said his master) I think I must venture." 
Then addressing himself to me,
"Hast thou ever blooded any body but brutes? But I need not ask thee, for thou wilt tell me a most damnable lie." 
"Brutes, Sir, (answered I, pulling down his glove in order to feel his pulse) I never meddle with brutes." 
"What the devil art thou about? (cried he) dost thou intend to twist off my hand? Gad ' s curse! my arm is benumbed up to the very shoulder! Heaven have mercy upon me! must I perish under the hands of savages? What an unfortunate dog was I to come on board without my own surgeon, Mr. Simper." 
I craved pardon for having handled him so roughly, and with the utmost care and tenderness tied up his arm with a fillet of silk. While I was seeling
for the vein, he desired to know how much blood I intended to take from him, and when I answered,
"Not above twelve ounces;"
started up with a look full of horror, and bid me begone, swearing I had a design upon his life. Vergette appeased him with some difficulty, and opening a bureau, took out a pair of scales, in one of which was placed a small cup; and putting them into my hand, told me, the captain never lost above an ounce and three drachms at one time. While I prepared for this important evacuation, there came into the cabbin, a young man, gayly dressed, of a very delicate complexion, with a kind of languid smile on his face, which seemed to have been rendered habitual, by a long course of affectation. The captain no sooner perceived him, than rising hastily, he flew into his arms, crying,
"O! my dear Simper! I am excessively disordered! I have been betrayed, frighted, murdered by the negligence of my servants, who suffered a beast, a mule, a bear to surprize me, and stink me into convulsions with the fumes of tobacco." 
Simper, who by this time, I found, was obliged to art for the clearness of his complexion, assumed an air of softness and sympathy, and lamented with many tender expressions of sorrow, the sad accident that had thrown him into that condition; then feeling his patient ' s pulse on the outside of his glove, gave it as his opinion, that his disorder was entirely nervous, and that some drops of tincture of castor and liquid laudanum, would be of more service to him than bleeding, by bridling the inordinate sallies of his spirits, and composing the fermentation of his bile proceeding therefrom. I was
therefore sent to prepare this prescription, which was administred in a glass of sack-posset, after the captain had been put to bed, and orders sent to the officers on the quarter-deck, to let no body walk on that side under which he lay.
While the captain enjoyed his repose, the doctor watched over him, and indeed became so necessary, that a cabin was made for him contiguous to the state-room, where Whiffle slept; that he might be at hand in case of accidents in the night. Next day, our commander being happily recovered, gave orders, that none of the lieutenants should appear upon deck, without a wig, sword, and ruffles; nor any midshipman, or other petty officer, be seen with a check shirt or dirty linen. He also prohibited any person whatever, except Simper and his own servants, from coming into the great cabbin, without first sending in to obtain leave. These singular regulations did not prepossess the ship ' s company in his favour; but on the contrary, gave scandal an opportunity to be very busy with his character, and accuse him of maintaining a correspondence with his surgeon, not fit to be named. 