
“The Five Senses”

Seeinge
From such a face whose Excellence
May Captivate my Soveraignes sence
And make him Phœbus like his throne
Resigne to him younge Phaëton
Whose skillesse and unsteaddie hand
May prove the ruine of a land
Unlesse great Jove downe from the skye
Beholding Earthes Calamitie
Strike with his hand that cannot err
The proud Usurping Charioter
And cure though Phœbus greive our woe
From such a face that cann worke soe
Wheresoere thou hast a beeing
Blesse my Soveraigne, and his seeing.

2. Heareinge
From Jeasts prophane, from flattering tongues
From bawdy tales from beastly soungs
From after supper suits that feare
A Parliament or Councells eare
From Spanish treaties that may wound
Our Countries peace the gospell sound
From Jobs false frends that would entice
My Soveraigne from Heavens paradise
From Prophetts such as Ahabs weere6
Whose flatterings sooth my soveraignes eare
His frownes more then his makers fearing
Blesse my soveraigne, and his heareing.

Tastinge
From all fruite that is forbidden
Such for which old Eve was chidden
From bread of Laborers sweat, and toyle
From the widdowes meale, and oyle
From the Canded poyson’d baites
Of Jesuites and their deceipts
Italian Salletts, Romish druggs
The milke of Babells proud whore duggs
From wyne that can destroye the braine
And from the daingerous figg of Spaine
Att all banquetts, and all feasting
Blesse my Soveraigne, and his tasting.

Feelinge
From prick of Conscience such a sting
As staines the Soule, heavens blesse my King
From such a tribe as may with drawe
His thoughts from equitie, and lawe
From such a smooth, and beardlesse Chinn
As may provoke, or tempt to sinn
From such a hand whose moyst palme may
My soveraigne lead out of the way
From things polluted, and uncleane
From all thats beastly, and obsceane
From what may sett his Soule a reeling
Blesse my Soveraigne, and his feeling.

Smellinge
Where Mirrhe, and frankinsence is throwne
The altars built to Gods unknowne
Oh lett my Soveraigne never smell
Such damn’d perfumes are fitt for hell
Let noe such scent his nostrills staine
From smells that poyson may the braine
Heavens still preserve him, Next I crave
Thou wilt be pleas’d great God to save
My Soveraigne from a Ganimede
Whose whoreish breath hath power to lead
His excellence which way it list
O lett such lipps be never kist
From a breath soe farr excelling
Blesse my Soveraigne and his smelling.

On all the Sences
And just God I humblie pray
That thou wilt take the Filme away
That keepes my Soveraignes eyes from vieweing
The things that wilbe our undoeing
Then lett him Heare good God the sounds
Aswell of Men, as of his hounds
Give him a Taste and tymely too
Of what his Subjects undergoe
Give him a Feelinge of there woes
And noe doubt his royall nose
Will quickely Smell those rascalls forth
Whose blacke deeds have ecclips’t his worth.
These found, and scourg’d for their offences
Heavens blesse my Soveraigne, and his sences.

Source. Bodleian MS Malone 23, pp. 28-31

