The offensiveness of the several processes described varies from none
at all to that which constitutes one of the most intolerable of nuisances.
On different occasions the interference or assistance of the Local
Government Board have been solicited for the suppression of nuisances
from works of this character. The most notable instances of applications of this kind of late years have been in respect of nuisances from
manure works along the shores of the Thames in 1873, and in respect
of similar nuisances at Plymouth in 1875. I reported to the Board fully
upon the former of these cases in December 1873, but more briefly
upon the latter of them, since at that time the present general inquiry
had been set on foot. It is difficult to describe odours except by the use
of similitudes. The offensive odour proceeding from superphosphate
works, from works in which animal matters are used more or less freely,
and from “ scutch ’’ manure works is, however, so distinctive that once
smelt it can never afterwards fail to be recognised. That from superphosphate making is pungent and slightly acid ; by some persons it is
called sickening, but its offensiveness and sickening quality are enhanced
where such animal matters as blood, offal, or fish, especially if putrid,
are employed in the manufacture of the manure. I know of no odour
more horribly sickening than that which is evolved when sulphuric acid
is mixed with human excrement. One of the most offensive works of
this kind that has come within my observation, where animal matter of
various kinds, and sometimes excrement, are used, is Bradb urn’s establishment at Wednesfield, upon which I reported to the Board in my
report on the sanitary condition of that place in 1874. The smell
proceeding from scutch manure works is described by some persons as
putrid as well as sickening. Dr. Gordon, the principal medical officer
of the Woolwich garrison, described to me the odour proceeding from
the scutch manure works on Erith marshes as resembling, more than
anything else, that which he had perceived in India when passing to
leeward of the places in which the Hindoos burn their dead. To myself
the odour resembles that of very decayed and putrid cheese. The odour
from superphosphate works has to my senses something of the same
character, especially marked when animal matters are used in addition
to bones and phosphates. The distance to which the offensive odour
may spread beyond the works varies with the various circumstances
mentioned in the first part of this Report. It may be only perceived
offensively within a radius of 100 yards or less around the works, or the
odour may extend a mile or more beyond them. For example, the
odour from the Avorks of Morris and Griffin at Wolverhampton is said to
be perceived offensively at Newbridge, a distance of 1 miles ; Avhile
that from the Erith marshes “ scutch ” manure works was, on the occasion
of my inquiry on the Thames, saic) to be an intolerable nuisance at the
Woolwich barracks, a distance 4 miles. Loud and grievous complaints
are made in the tOAvn of Plymouth, especially by persons residing about
the Hoe, of the offensive odours from the manure works at Cattedown,
a distance of about 1 mile, when the wind blows from that direction
across the bay.

I have made such inquiries as were practicable as to the effect of
these offensive odours upon the health of persons exposed to them.
Replies to individual inquiries have been to the effect that prolonged
exposure to the offensive odours produces feelings of depression, headache, indisposition for food, nausea, or even sometimes fainting. These,
however, are ordinary results in sensitive individuals of the impression
made by any specially offensive odour upon the nervous system. They
pass off, however, with the intermission of their cause. I have not
been able to ascertain that any permanent injury to health has followed
even the frequent repetition of exposure to these offensive odours.
Nevertheless, so long as the cause operates it does to a serious extent
sometimes disturb the health of some individuals. 