Curry Powder is ordinarily a mixture of turmeric, black
pepper, coriander seeds, cayenne, cardamoms, cumin, fenugreek, ginger, allspice, and cloves. Turmeric, the ingredient
furnishing the colouring matter, forms the largest proportion.
There is only a small quantity of cayenne, cardamoms,
cumin, and fenugreek. Ginger, allspice, and cloves are often
omitted. Turmeric powder is obtained from the Curucma
longa. The ground turners of the plant are dried and
ground to flour. It is said to be adulterated with alkali to
heighten the colour, and with yellow ochre. 
The fruit of the coriander is round, and nearly as large as white pepper.
It contains two brown-coloured hemispherical seeds, having
an aromatic taste and odour. The seed-vessels, or pods, of
cardamom are of triangular form, each containing several
hard, reddish-brown seeds, having a pungent taste, and
popularly known as "grains of paradise." Cumin and fenugreek seeds are aromatic seeds having a peculiar medicinal
taste and odour. The characteristic flavour of curry is due
largely to the cumin it contains. Curry has been found to
be adulterated with ground rice, potato starch, common salt,
red lead, and ferruginous earths.

Olive Oil is expressed from olives, the fruit of a well-known
tree cultivated in many European countries. Olives should
furnish from 20 to 25 per cent, of their weight of oil, but
the whole yield is not usually of the same quality. The
pure oil is pale yellow, transparent, of agreeable odour and
bland taste. It keeps well, being little liable to become
rancid.


Olive oil is not infrequently adulterated with cotton-seed
oil, rape oil, and other cheap vegetable oils. Taking the
specific gravity is often sufficient to show there is an adulterant present, and to warrant the food inspector in sending
a sample to an expert. The specific gravity of olive oil is
917-6 at 59 deg. Fah.

Vinegar. — Commercial vinegar is a more or less impure
acetic acid. Besides acetic acid it usually contains some
alcohol, acetic ether, sugar, gum, various salts, &c, its composition depending to some extent on the substances from
which it has been produced.

The different varieties of vinegar, according to their
source, are malt, wine, cider, beet, sugar, and wood vinegars.
Acetic acid is the volatile principle in all, to the presence of
which vinegar mainly owes its aroma and pungency. It
may be generated by the fermentation  of many vegetable
and some animal substances. Any vegetable infusion
capable of yielding alcohol will furnish vinegar.