Grooms and Hostlers daily inhale a large quantity of ammoniacal gas generated in the stables.
This appears beneficial rather than injurious. They
have, moreover, full and varied muscular exertion ;
and if they took a more moderate diet, would be almost universally robust. Hostlers, Porters, and
under-male servants at inns, are generally sickly,

and labour under congestion (over fulness) of the vessels in the abdomen and head. Their state evidently
results from the ale and spirits they take so frequently.

Glue and Size boilers are exposed to strong putrid and ammoniacal exhalations from the decomposition of animal refuse. The stench of the boiling
and drying rooms is indeed well known to be highly
offensive, even to the neighbourhood. Yet the men
declare it agrees well with them — nay, many assert,
that on entering this employ, they experienced a
great increase of appetite and health. All the glue
and size boilers we saw, were remarkably fresh-looking and robust. Though exposed to frequent and
considerable changes of temperature, to sudden
changes also from an atmosphere of hot vapour to
the dry cold air, they are not subject to rheumatism,
pulmonary inflammation or catarrh. The only complaints we could hear of, were occasional pains in the
loins and hmbs, attributable to posture and exertion.

Buckram manufacturers are exposed to the
odour of the glue. This is well known to be so great
as to offend the neighbourhood of the manufacture.
Yet the men make no complaint of ill health, and
reach considerable age. Of the seven men employed
at the Buckram-house, in Water-lane, one is 51,
another 58, a third 68, and the fourth 76; and these
individuals have been at the employ from an early age.

Tallow-chandlers, subjected to an offensive
animal odour, enjoy health, and attain a considerable
age. During the plague in London it was remarked
that this class of men suffered much less than others.

Tanners, it is well known, arc subject to disagreeable odours. They work in an atmosphere largely
impregnated with the vapour of putrifying skins, and
this combined with the smell of lime in one place,
and of tan in another. They are exposed constantly
to wet and cold. Their feet are scarcely ever dry.
Yet they are remarkably robust; the countenance
florid ; and disease almost unknown. t Tanners are
said to be exempt from consumption ; and the subject
has of late been repeatedly discussed in one of the
medical societies of London. We have carefully inquired at several tan-yards, and could not hear of a
single example of this formidable disease. We do
not find old men actually in the employ; and the
reason assigned is, not the decline of health, but the
inferiority of men past middle age, in undergoing the
labour of the process. Persons however in advanced
life, yet healthy, are found in other occupations, who
have before been for many years in the tan-yards,
and have not apparently suffered from the long continued exposure to their offensive odour. Hence we
may infer that this employ, while it invigorates the
constitution in youth and middle age, does not sensibly shorten life ; does not, in other words, give temporary health at the expense of premature decline.

Ramazzini tells us, that at Padua the tan-yards
were permitted only in the  '  suburbs. Here also, as
the stench would be considered a nuisance, tan-yards
are at the outskirts. As a matter of medical police,
however, we see no occasion for their exclusion from
the town.
