No euil may either procéed or take beginning from the heauens, bause in that holy place all thinges are good, and such as remble the diuinitie, and nothing that sauoureth of malice may abide and haue place: neither saith he, can the starres chaunge their nature, because it is simple and pure, neither can they degenerate from the simplicitie and puritie which by the Almightie power hath bene bestowed vpon them.
Why then shall we attribute vnto them a malignant, pestilent, and contagious qualitie, and such as rauisheth and spoyleth all ling creatures by a venemous and pestilent influence? For if contagion be as badde a thing as may be (as in truth it is) the most disordinate and contrary to nature, or rather enemy to life) the source and originall of which contagion, is nothing but very infirmitie, putrifaction and corruption in matter, how dare we attribute to the starres & heauen (which is the binning of all generation) such an erroneous and vnnaturall accident? Wheras the Planets are Celestiall bodies, well diosed, powerfull, without vice, corruption, or matter, subiect or inclining to any contagion: And therefore Auerrois the chiefe Commenter vpon Aristotle saith;
That whosoeuer beléeueth that Mars or any other Planet disposed in any sort whatsoeuer, doth hurt to any inferiour bodies; the same man in sooth beléeueth such things as are estraunged from all Philophie. And the same Author vpon the ninth of Aristotles
Metaphisiques, saith; that the Celestiall bodies which are the beginning of all things are eternall, and haue neither euil error or corruption in them; for corruption is of the order of such things as are euil.
And therefore saith he, it is impossible to know that which the Astronomers say, that there are some fortunate, and some vnfortunate starres, but this only may be knowne, that whereas all of them are good, that some of them are better then other some. Behold here the worthy and true opinion of this excellent Philosopher, which before him (in as much as concerneth the first part of this sentence) Aristotle in the ninth of his Phisiques, Chapter 10. had testified. The wise Philosopher Mercury Trimisgistus in his Dialogue iituled Asclepius, saith; that all that which descendeth from heauen is generatiue; if then in respect of vs the influence of heauen be generatiue (as in truth it is): for as Aristotle saith, Sol & homo generant homine?) it cannot any waies be possible that it can corrupt or cause the confusion of mankinde. The like also is confirmed by Proclus, (who interpreteth vpon Platoes booke de Anima & Demone,) The Celestiall bodies (saith he) by a soueraigne harmony containe all thinges in themselues, and perfect them, and conforme them among themselues: and to the vniuers, If then it appeareth that the Celectiall bodies perfect all things, and both confirme & coerue them, (as in truth they doo, and this Author witnesseth) how can these engender contagion and infection in vs, which abolishe our perfection and integritie, and destroy vs by rauishing our liues? To speake truth, as me séemeth it were a thing impossible. For it is contrary to the nature of contagn, that it should descend from heauen, because contagion is no other thing but an infection procéeding from one vnto an other by communication of a pestilent and infected vapour, and by this meanes if the Plague and contagion procéeded from the starres, it should necessarily follow by the definition of contagion, that the starres were primarily or formerly iected, if by their influence they should send a pernicious coagion among vs. But this in no sort may be graunted, bause
the starres by being Celestiall bodies, pure, diuine, and estranged from all corruption, receiuing and containing no infection in them, being no materiall bodies apt to transmution or chaunge, (as Aristotle and Auerrois in his Booke de Caelo est mundo, doo learnedly alledge) cannot be capable of iection or contagion, neyther communicate it to the inferior bodies. Let vs therefore cast off this vaine and sottish opinn whereby we are induced to beléeue that the Plague préedeth from the heauens: that is to say, from the influence of the starres, (as by the vanitie of time we haue had inducents.) But let vs confesse that it procéedeth from the secret iudgements of God, who intendeth by this scourge to whip vs for our sinnes, as it appeareth in Leuiticus, and Deeronomy? To conclude, we say that the cause of the Plague is a malignant alteration and corruption of the ayre iecting our bodies, as it hath bene declared in the beginning of this Chapter.
CHAP. III. Of the signes of the Plague, both impendent and prent, with the good and euil signes appearing in pesterous sicknesses.
THe signes whereby a man may know the iection of the aire which threatneth vs with Pestilent sicknesses, are, when as we sée the same continuall and accustomably troubled with thicke, cloudy, moyst, and ill smelling vapours, the Skie vnaccustomed to Nohren windes, but sollicited with Southerly blastes; The aire full of fogges and vapours, making a showe of raine without any showers: For such signes as are of that nature engender corrupt Feuours, as Aristotle saith in his Prleames. If the winter be hote and moyst, and obserue not his naturall temperature, and when the Spring time is vy dry without raine, and notwithstanding colde, and aer for many dayes charged with Southerly windes, troled aire, and then cleare, and afterwards suddainly oueast, the nights colde, and the day very hotte and soultry, It signifieth that we shall haue an euil Plague the Sommer after. Moreouer, if at that time there appeare any increase of such creatures as are engendred of putrifaction, as wormes of the earth, flies, gnattes, eales, serpents, toades, frogs, and such like foretokening corruptio? and putrifaction in the earth and waters, and when the aire the same day chaungeth from faire to foule, and from cleare to cloudy, when the Sunne sheth and afterwards hideth his head in cloudes, in one and the same day, it is a signe that the temperature of the aire is altered. And when as Rats, Moules, and other creatures, (austomed to liue vnder ground) forsake their holes and habitions, it is a token of corruption in the same, by reason that such sorts of creatures forsake their wonted places of aboade. And when as the Birds of the aire fall downe dead, or forsake
their nests, it is a signe of great corruption and contagion in the same. Long and continuall raines, accompanied with Southerly windes, dispose the ayre to sicknesses and putrifaion, as Hipocrates, and Galen testifie in their Epidemies. When as Feuers are accompanied with small Poxe, or Mels, with spots, or red markes like to the biting of Fleas, it is a signe of a pestilent Feuer. When the sicke is very much tormented with the passion of the heart, vomitings, soundings, or weaknes, or faintnes of the hart, without great outward but vehement inward both heate and drought, with appearance of swellings, botches, carbuncles, and Mesels, without all qution he is seized with a pestilential Feuer, especially if diuers at the same time and in the same place are attainted with the same griefe: and if so be the partie which is infected hath fruented places both contagious and infected. Sée heere the the principall signes of the Plague and pestilentiall Feuer. The euill, dangerous, and mortall signes in such as are diseed, are féeblenes and weaknes of the regitiue vertue of the by (which may be discouered by the pulse when it is weake, vquall, disorderly, lanquishing and intermittent, by often Siopes or soundings, alienation, and frenzie, blewnesse and blacknesse appearing about the sores and carbuncles, and after their appearances the sodaine vanishings of the same, cold in the extreame partes, and intollerable heate in the iard, vnquenchable thirst, cinually soundings, vrines white and crude, or red, troubled and blacke: Colde swet about the forehead and face; crampes, blacknesse in the excrements of the body, stench, and blewnes, the flux of the belly, with weaesse of the heart, shortnes of breath, and great stench of the same, lacke of sléepe, and appetite to eate, profound sléepe, chaunging of colour in the face, exchaunged to palenesse, blacesse, or blewnesse, cogitation or great vnquietnes. All these signes betoken either certaine death or daunger thereof in the Plague; euen as contrariwise the contrary foretoken recouy of the sicknesse, by reason they testifie vpon the regitiue power and vertue of the bodie, goodnesse of the complexion,
and vertue of the same, with strength of ye hart. For as Auicen sayth: They that are manly, and confidently beare out their sicknesse without any showe of feare, they are those which for the most part escape. Likewise to haue a good appetite to sléepe in repose, without disturbance of the body, it is a good signe. The Botches, and Carbuncles to retaine a good colour, and without great paine to be brought to ripenesse and suppation, to haue a moderate heate mayntained through all the body: The vrines, in disgestion, colour, substance, & contents, to be good: To haue easie breathing, swet warme, & vniuersall through all the body, appearing on a decretory or criticall day. All these signes appearing in the infected person, giue great hope of his recouery. These bée the signes and tokens by which you may gather a sure and vnfained iudgement of that which shall befall him that is attainted with the Plague.

CHAP. IIII. A Rule and instruction to preserue such as be in health, from the infection.
WHen as (by the will of GOD) the contagion of the Plague is gotten into any place, Citie, or Countrey; we ought to haue an especiall regard of the generall good, and by all meanes to study for their preseruation who are in health, least they fall into such inconueniencie. First of all, therefore it behooueth euery man to haue speciall care that he frequent not any places or persons infected, neither that hée suffer such to breath vpon him: but as Galen hath learnedly aduised, in his Booke De Differentijs Frebrium, Chap. 2. Estrange himselfe as farre as him lyeth, from their societie. The first and chiefest remedie then, is to chaunge the place, flie farre and returne late: Hipocrates, likewise in his Booke De Natura humana, saith: that wee ought to foake the place whereas a generall sicknesse rangeth, accoing to the common Prouerbe, Cito, longe, tarde. And if nessitie constraineth vs to frequent the infected, (either to be aistant to our friends, or otherwise:) euery man ought to deane
himself in such sort that the sick mans breath doo not aaint him: which may very easily be done, if a man haue ye skill to choose & take the winde that properly bloweth towards the sicke & infected, and not from the infected to the healthfull: And therefore in that case the healthfull ought to kéepe themselues vnder, not ouer the winde. The first part of preseruation, is to purifie and purge the ayre from all euill vapours, sentes, stench, corruption, putrifaction, and euill qualitie. For which cause, it is necessary to make good fumes in our houses, of swéet and wholesome wood, as Rosemarie, Iuniper, and Lawrell, or Bayes, and to perfume the whole house and chambers with the fume of Rosemary, Iuniper, the parings of Apples, Stax, Beniamin, Incence, dried Roses, Lauender, and such like, both Euening and Morning. It is not amisse likewise at euy corner of the stréet, (at least twise in the wéek) to make cleare and quicke Bonefires to consume the malignant vapours of the ayre, according as Acron the great Phisitian, commaued to be done during the mortall plague in Greece: As Paus Aegineta testifieth in his second Booke, Chap. 35. It is good also to weare swéet sauors and perfumes about vs, such as in Winter time, are Marcorame, Rosemarie, Storax, Beniamin, or to make a Pomander after this sort that eueth, and to weare it about vs to smell too vpon all opertunies. Take of the flowers of red Roses, of Violets, of Blos, of each halfe a little handfull, of the thrée Sanders, of each a Dramme; of the rootes of Angelica, Gentian, and Zedoary, of each foure scruples; of white Encens, Cloues, Nutmegs, Calamus, Aromaticus, of each a dram, of Storax, Calumit, and red Beniamin, of each a dramme and a halfe, of orientall Muske a scruple, of Amber-greece halfe a scruple, of Ladaum infused in Rose-water one ounce, mixe all these together in Rose-water where in the Gum Dragacanth hath béene infused, and with a little of Rose-vinegar make a paste, of which you may forme certaine rounde Pomanders, to weare about your necke, and smell vnto continually. Or take of Rose-water thrée ounces,
of white Vinegar, of Roses ij, ounces, of white Wine, or pure Malmosie two spoonfuls, of the powder of Cloues, of the roote of Angelica and Storax of each halfe a dramme, mixe them all together, and with this liquor it shall not be amisse to wash your hands, bedeaw your forehead & nostrils, and the pulces of your armes, for such an odour and of so wholesome a qualitie, vehemently repulceth the venome that assaileth the heart, and altereth the pestilence of the ayre. It shall not be amisse likise to carrie an Angelica roote in your mouth, or a Gentian or Zedoary roote, or else the rine of an Orange, Lemon, or Pomecitron, which as Auicen testifieth haue soueraine eects in this case. The continual vses of these good odors coorteth the heart and vitall spirites, driueth away all venous vapours, and rectifieth the ayre that whirleth about vs, as Auicen testifieth in his Booke, Of the Forces of the Heart. For which cause, they which desire the continuance of their health, ought neuer to be vnprouided of these things. Amongst all other medicines that haue the propertie to coort and reioyce the heart, the Easterne Hyacinth, béeing worne about the brest, and next vnto the naked skin, or else held in the mouth is very effectuall, as Auicen testifieth, in his Booke, Of the Forces of the Heart, (in that Chapter wherein hée entreateth of the Hyacinth,) where hée saith; that the sayd Stone hath not only a propertie to fortifie the heart, and quicken the vitall spirites, but also to resist all vomes. For which I aduise all such as haue both meanes and maintenance to get such a iewel, to carrie the same either in their mouthes, or continually about their neckes, neare vnto the region of their hearts, by reason of that eellent propertie which all Authors by vniforme consent attribute vnto the same.

CHAP. V. The meanes and preseruatiues which are to be ministred inwardly against the Plague.
GAlen in his first booke of the differences of Feuers, and in that Chapter whern he intreateth of the pestilent Feuer, saith: That to preserue the body from infection, it shall be very necessarie to clense and purifie the same from al couptions and superfluities, by sit puations, and to take away these oppilations, and stoings, which are the meanes that naturall heat cannot bee dispersed, & to dry the body from humidities, and to maiaine such bodyes as are drie in their Estates. In imitation of whose opinion and direction, it shall be good to euacuat and expell those superfluities of humours, which abound accoing to there natures, age, complexion, vertue, quantitie and qualitie, who are forced with the same superfluous humours. It is therefore note worthy, in suspected and dangerous times that no accustomed euacuations either by fluxe of Hemeroes, or of the belly, old vlcers, menstruall blood, itches, or such like should be restrained. For those purgations which are of this kinde doo clense the vnnecessary humours, and by this meanes maketh the body healthfull, whereas such humours being either repressed by astringent medecines or such like ointments, might greatly hurt the principall members, and produce strange sicknesses in the same. And for this cause, Gen, and Hipocrates write: That it is a good signe when as any defluxion is expelled, from the inward and principall parts of the body: where contrariwise, if the same be tranorted from the outward to the inward parts? it is a most euil and sinister signe. For which cause in the Plague time it is the surest way, rather to suffer those superfluities to haue their course, then to stop or stay them by any medecine because by the voydance thereof, the body is purged from the same
superfluities which being retained might wonderful annoy it. Which counsaile of theirs, may serue for an aduertisement to all those that shall be so disposed and affected in the time of the Plague. It behooueth therefore such as be Sanguine, full in loue, and youthfull in yeares, to be let blood after a competent manner, thereby to diminish their replexion and aboundance of blood. Those that are chollerique, ought to be purged with an infusion of Rubarb; if they be wealthy: and if poore, with the Electuary of the iuice or Roses, by taking thrée Drammes, or halfe an ounce thereof in Sorrell, Endiue, or Purslane wer, or else by Diacatholium, Diaprunis, Laxatiue, the sirope of Roses, Cassia, or the pilles of Rubarb, Femetorie, or those that for their gentle working are called (by the Phisitians) Aeae. The Flegmatique, ought to be purged with Agaric, Diaphenicon, Diacarthami, the pils Aggregatine, Cochiae, according to the strength of their bodyes, the qualitie of the hor which are offensiue? at the discreton of the learned & expienced Phisitians, by whose directions and prescriptions such medecines are to be ministred, & not according to the custome of this time, by foolish Idiotes and ignorant Emperiques. Such as are melancholy should be purged with the infusion of Sena and Epithemum with a little Anice seede, and Diachelicon, with the Confection, Hamech, Diasene, Solutiue, the pilles of Femitory, and Aureae. I forbeare to call the pils, De lape Armeno, and Lasuli into vse, because they are too vient, and scarcely well prepared. Such as are weake and delicate persons (As woman with childe, children, and aged people,) it shall suffice to purge them with an ounce of Cassia, extracted with halfe or a whole dramme of Rubarb, or two ounces of Manna, or thrée ounces of sirope of Roses, or with the sirope of Sucery with Rubarb, but with this Prouiso aayes, that the direction be taken from a learned and diligent Phisitian, and not according to the fancie of foolish chare wen, and ignorant practizers. 