At the foote of the Mountaine there is a hole, where the vapours with their owne motion, continually cast vp little stones and stinking smelles; but if any man moue these vapours by a staffe, or any thing put into the hole, the more they are stirred, the greater stones they cast vp, yea flames of fire sometimes.
There bee some cottages neere this place, where they make Brimstone, and all these parts smell of brimstone, and if the winde blow from hence towards Naples, the stinke thereof may bee smelled thither.
On all sides here be Baths of wholesome waters, which of old were famous.


After we had passed huge ruines of old buildings, we came at the foot of a mouaine to the City (p) Pozzoli, of old famous, and called Puteolis, to which all these ruines are said to haue belonged of old, and it had the name of the Latin word Puteus, as also it hath the present name from the Italian tong, of the wels, which are frequent.
I say it hath the present name of the Italian word Pozzo, signifying a well, though some will haue it named presently of Puzzo, which signifies a stink, because of the smell of britone in these parts: but the city being most ancient, cannot haue the old name of an Itian word: and it is certaine, that the Roman Princes of old vsed this part for the place of their recreation; for the great sweetnes of the Country, and the plenty of medicinall waters, whereupon they gaue it the first name.
Others say that it was of old called Diarchiam, but at this day it is called Pozzoli, or Puzzoli.
Here we dined, and were foed to giue our swords to the Host, there being a great penalty set vpon any that carry their Armes.
The City hath nothing worth the seeing, but the old Church, first built to Heathen Idols, and after by Christians dedicated to Saint Proculus, and it hath the names of the workemen that built it grauen vpon it, and there be shewed the bones of a Giant of wonderfull bignes.
The Hauen of this City was of old very commodious, but by negligence is growne of no vse.


Here the sea entring betweene two Mountaines, was of old called the Creeke of (P) Baie, of that Citie seated on the opposite shore, or the Creeke of Pozzoli, of this Cie.
Suetonius writes that the Emperour Tiberius consulting about his successor, and inclining more to his true Nephew, Thrasyllus the Mathematitian should answere, that Catus should no more raigne, then he should ride ouer the Creeke of Baie.
Wherefore Caius being Emperour, and hearing of this diuination (not as others say, in emulation of Xees, who made a Bridge ouer Hellespont, nor to the end that with the fame of this great worke, he might terrifie the rebellious Germans and Britans) did build a Bridge ouer this creeke of the sea, being about three miles long, that hee might thereupon passe from Baie to Pozzoli.
Of this Bridge thirteene piles of bricke may bee seene neere the shore at Pozzoli, and as many on the other side neere the shore of Baie, and some of these piles haue yet arches vpon them, but ready to fall.
And from these piles the Ier part of the bridge was founded vpon two rankes of shippes fastened with ancors, and couered ouer with a bancke of earth, to make the passage like the way of Appius.

 	
The rest Suetonius addeth in these or the like words.
Ouer this bridge he went to and fro for two daies; the first day vpon a trapped horse, hauing his head adorned with a Crowne of Oake leaues, and bearing an Hatchet, a Sword, and a Garland, and a robe of cloth of Gold.
The next day in a Coch-mans habit, driuing a Coch drawne by foure famous horses, carrying before him Darius a childe, one of the pledges giuen by the Parthians, his Pretorian Souldiers accompanying him, and his friends following him in a Coach, &c.
He that desires to compreh the magnificence of this work, must first know, that the Mediterranean sea is very calme, hauing little or no ebbing or flong, and that this Creeke is yet more calme, and that this bridge was built in the furthest part of the Creeke, very neere the land.
These things considered, (if my iudgement faile not), there is greater cause of wonder at the Bridge built by the Duke of Parma besieging Antwerp, being in like sort built vpon barkes fastened one to the other, and also at the Bridge of London, bearing a great ebbing and flowing of the sea, and built of free stone, vpon so firme a foundation, as it beareth many great and faire houses vpon it: but whatsoeuer the magnificence were, surely the vanitie of this worke was great, to spend so much vpon this Bridge, the way by land being not a mile longer then by the Bridge.
Giue me leaue to digresse so farre, as to remember, that the Territorie of Fernum is not farre from Pozzols, the wine whereof called Falernum, is so much praised by Horace.
After dinner we went from Pozzoii, to view the Antiquities lying vpon this Creeke; and first we came to the Labyrinth, a building vnder ground, which hath the name of the multitude of roomes, with such passages to and fro; as a man may loose himselfe in them; and here wee had not onely neede of the thread of Ariadne, but of light also to conduct vs.
Leander thinks, that all this building was to keepe fresh water: Then we came to the Amphitheater, being of an Ouall forme, the inner part whereof is 172 foot long, and 88 broad, the building whereof is little ruined: And Suetonius writes, that this was built for the Plaies of Vulcan.
Not farre thence, neere the shoare, is a fouaine of cleare and sweete water, flowing plentifully out of the sea, so that for a great distance we might with our eies distinguish the same from the sea water, which Leander thinks to haue been brought by pipes vnder the earth, to these houses of the old Rans.
Neere this place are the ruines of many buildings, now called Belgeimano, which the Emperour Tiberius is said to haue built, when hereturned with triumph from the German warre.
Betweene the rocks that compasse this sea, is the way Attellane, which leades those that passe to Rome, to the way of Appins, and there be many baths, for most of the waters are medicinall.


Neere the Lake of Auernus vpo? the side towards Pozzoli, lies a Mountaine, (q) which lately broke out of the earth, where of old were the bathes of Tripergola, whence the dwellings in this part, and this place, are called Tripergola, and here of old were many large and stately buildings, but by reason of many Earthquakes, and roberies of Pirats, the houses were long since forsaken, and at last in the yeere 1538 were swallowed vp by the earth.
For in that yeere vpon Michaelmas day was a terrible Earthquake in this place, which brake out with fire in great flames, casting vp stones, with a great tempest of winde, and darkenesse of the aire, so as the people thought the worlds end was come.
And at this time the ashes of this fire were carried by the winde to places twentie miles distant.
At last after seuen daies, this confusion ceased, and then the aforesaid Mouaine breaking out of the bowels of the earth was first seene, being three miles high, and at the bottom foure miles compasse.
Vpon the toppe of this Mountaine is a hole some fistie paces broad, which towards the bottom growes more and more narrow, where it seemeth round, and of little compasse, hauing a cleare water, yet giuing a stink of britone, and this hole is like a Theater made by art.
In the foresaid fearefull Earthquake, caused by the breaking out of the vapours inclosed vnder the hollow earth, many fous bathes were lost, and no more seene.
Not farre hence is the Mountaine of Christ, so called, because they say, that Christ with the squadrons of the Fathers, passed this way when hee ascended from Hell.
But the French Gentleman Villamont worthily iudgeth this to be fabulous, and likewise the miracle of the Crucifex here, bearing the markes of Christ, yet doth he giue too much credit to the miracles of Loreto.



Vpon the shore of the creek of (r) Baie, lies the Lake (as Virgil saith) of the foule stinng Auernus.
This Lake is a naturall Hauen, but is not vsed, because the Hauen of Lrinus is betweene it and the sea.
It is compassed with high hils on all sides, but onely where the Sea enters on the South-side at a passage fifty paces broad, and the forme of it is round, and the hils that compasse it now seeme pleasant, but of old were all coued with a thicke wood, which shutting vp the aire, and by the shadow drawing many birds to it, was thought to be the cause that these birds stifled with the smell of britone, fell suddenly dead, till the Emperour Augustus caused the wood to be destroied.
And of the birds thus killed, the Lake was called Auernus.
For this smell of brimstone, and the shadow of the foresaid wood, darkening the Lake, and the blacke colour of the water, and because the sunne is shut out from the Lake by the hils, this Lake was feined by the Poets to be one of the Lakes of hell.

