Of Beasts living in the Water.
Their Otters are most of them black, and their skins are almost as good
as Bevers; Their Oyl is of rare use for many things. Martins also have a
good Fur for their bigness. Musquashes are almost like Beavers, but
not so big, the Males stones smells as sweet as Musk, and being killed
in Winter or the Spring they never loose their sweetness: they are no
bigger than Cony-skins, and yet are sold for five shillings a piece. One
good Skin will perfume a whole house full of Clothes. The Bevers
wisdom and understanding makes him come nigh to a reasonable creature.
His body is thick and short, with short leggs, feet like a Mole before,
and behind like a Goose, a broad tail like a shoo-sole, very tough
and strong: His head is something like an Otters, saving that his foreeteth
be like Conies, two above and two beneath, sharp and broad, with
which he cuts down Trees as big as a mans thigh, or bigger, which afterwards
he divides into lengths according to the uses they are appoinetd
for. If one Beaver be too weak to carry the Log, than another helps
him: If two be too weak, three or four will assist, being placed three
to three, which set their teeth in one anothers tough tails, and laying
the load on the hindermost, they draw the Logg to the desired place, they
tow it in the water, the youngest getting under it, bearing it up that it
may swim the lighter. They build their houses of Wood and Clay,
close by a Ponds side, and knowing their seasons, they build their houses
answerably, three stories high, that when the Land Floods come they
may shift higher, and when the waters fall, they remove lower. These
houses are so strong that no Creature, save an industrious man with his
penetrating tools can pierce them, their ingress and egress being under
water. They make very good Ponds; for knowing where a stream
runs from between two rising Hills, they will pitch down Piles of Wood
placing smaller Rubbish before it, with clay and sods, not leaving till by
their Art and Industry they have made a firm and curious Dam-head,
which may cause admiration in wise men. They keep themselves to
their own Families, never parting so long as they are able to keep house
together. Their wisdom secures them from the English, who seldom
kill any of them, wanting time and patience to lay a long siege, or to
be often deceived by their cunning evasions. So that all our Beavers
come from the Indians, whose time and experience fits them for that
imployment.

Of the Birds, and Fowls both of Land and Water. They are expressed in these Verses.
The princely Eagle, and the soaring Hawks,
Within their unknown wayes ther ' s none can chawk:
The Hum-Bird for some Queens rich Cage more fit
Than in the vacant wilderness to sit.
The swift-wing ' d Swallow sweeping to and fro,
As swift as arrow from Tartarian bow.
When as Aurora ' s infant day new Springs,
There th '  morning mounting Lark her sweet layes sings.
The harmonious Thrush, swift Pigeon, Turtle Dove
Who to her Mate doth ever constant prove.
The Turkey, Pheasant, Heathcock, Partridge rare,
The Carrion-tearing Crow, and hurtful Stare;
The long-liv ' d Raven, th '  ominous Screach-Owl,
Who tell (as old wives say) disasters foul.
The drowsie Madge that leaves her day-lov ' d nest
To fly abroad when day-birds are at rest:
The Eele murthering Hern, and greedy Cormorant,
That neer the Creeks in Moorish Marshes haunt.
The bellowing Bittern, with the long legg ' d Crane.
Presaging Winters hard, and dearth of Graine.
