
Of the Molucco Jles.
THey are numbred five. Molucco. Gillolo. Ternate. Tidore. and Mahan (where Magellan after his long voyage Anno 1520 lost his life by treachery of these barbarians.) The English were the first that ever tradd to these Iles of any Christians: and most of them have acknowledg ' d our King their Sovereigne: but by the Duch it seemes our men are now thrust out, as if all India were theirs by title from the Creation.

Of these Gillolo is greatest; but in Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger, Pepper, Oyle, Aloes, and Honey, all of them alike plentifull. All or most of these, have the Equinoctiall for their Zenyth, and by those diurnall showres, and breezes which faile them not, and Apolloes commorance, the the fruits ripen sooner, the earth smells more aromaticall, and the Ayre seemes more nutritive than in other places. Let us rest a little upon some fruit descriptions.

*The Clove tree differs in proportion according to the place it receives vigor in: some being comparable to the Bay, others to Box or such like trees of humble stature;  ' tis, most part of the yeere green and pleasant, having leaves long and small, distending into many branches: It blossmes early, and becomes exceeding inconstant in complexion; from a virgin white palliating other colours: in the morne a pale green, in the meridian a distempered red, & sleepes in blacknesse. The Cloves manifest themselves at the utmost end of all the branches in great plenty; and in their growng evaporate such sense ravishing odours, as if a compendium of Natures sweetest gums and delicacies were extracted and here uunited: they are thrice yeerly pruined, and gratefully retort a treble vintage: and though but perfected in 3 yeares, yet must be counted an advantage; for Physitins tell us, they are hot and drie in the third degree, corroborate the stoack, and benefit concoction.

*The Nutmegg (or great Nut) like those trees most famous for their exllencies, is not very lofty in its heigth, scarce so proper as the Cherrie; by some, resembled to the Peach, with which it varies in forme of leafe and graine, affecting more assize and compasse. The Nut is cloathed with a defensive husk like those of baser quality, but at full ripenesse disroabs it selfe, and discovers her naked purity the Mace, which chastely intwines (with a vermilliion blush or colour) her endeared fruit and sister, both of them breathing out most pleasing smells and perfumes: the Mace in few dayes (like choisest beauties) by Apolloes wanton flames becom ' s tawny and unlike her former braverie: yet in that dissent, best pleases the rustick gatherer.


Neere the Molucco ' s, and neerer the Antartique, wee see many other Iles, noble in esteeme, and rich in qualitie: but, for that more than bararous basenesse our miserable Country-men suffered by the Dutch, we have no pleasure to stand upon any thing save recitall; such are Amboyna, (placed  ' twixt Banda and Molucso:) Banda, (in 4, degrees 30 minutes, and (from Amboyna 24 leagues:) Puloway, (from Banda 3 leagues:) Puloreen, (from Puloway W.N.W.) Lantore, (the greatest of the Iles of Banda:) Baan: Labatacka, Nero, Ticobassa, Cumber, Salame, and others: all of them, especially Puloway and Puloreen, seeming continued wildernesses of Nutegs and Clove-trees, Pepper, Vines, and Olives. These two last named commerced first with our Merchants, and contracted a perpetuall Amity and Fealty to our King; but in despight of them and us, the uncivill Dutch (whom for their braving humours here, pride, hate, and bloody execuion of our innocent men at Amboyna and other places in India, I cannot name with patience) have banisht our Merchants, and entitle themselves Lords of most of Banda Ilands, caring neither what right the Tarnatensian nor Banda Kings have over them.

From these, steer wee another course, to Borneo a great and wealthy Iland. We are soone in sight of it, the gale is so prosperous.

Of Borneo.
BORNEO, or insula bonae fortunoe in Ptol. is Nadyr to the Aequator; and resembles an ovall shield; the major part inclining North: Antartick elevation not mounting above 3 degrees; Artick, to 7 and odde minutes: & owes her first discovery (by any Christian European) to one de Bren, who in the yeere of our blessed Lord 1523. anchored here. It groanes at this day, (for the most part) under Spanish bondage; who in any place where gold or other treasure is to bee had, cease not till they can master it; vaewing neither soule nor body of any Inhabitant, (save for their lust) with the least weight of that too much soule-confounding creature. But let us consider! Nulla Coelum reparabile gaza.

It has many Villages and people; but the one are poore in their maeriall; the other more wretched in their infernall Religion, and late taught Idolatry: both, no way valewable; did not those mynes of Gold and Dyamonds, and some other merchandises; as, Bezarrs, Musk, Amer, Lignum Aloes, Sanguis Draconûm, Wax, Rice, and Rattans or Canes make her most magneticall. Her marittim Townes and Ports exceed not for number, but Peu & bon. Socodania, (in 1 deg. 35 minutes South, from Bantam N. E. 160 leagues) and Bemermassin; Little, but good, if such thou interpret. Safety and Satiety.

We are landed in so good a place, that wee will rest our wearied feet awhile, and entertaine your curiosity with a few viands; friends (though simple food) to infeobled Nature. Bezar, Lignum Aloes, Musk, Civit, Benjamin, and Amber.

Bezar, or (as the Persians call it) Pezar, is of two sorts; generated in Persia and both the Indyes: the American is worse than be these of Asia and the Orient. The shape also is various; some resembling a plum, some


a Date-stone, others like Egges of Doves, some like Cheznuts, and Goats kidnies; all agree in this, they are blunt ended: they are no lesse incontant and divers in colour; some being red, pale-greene some, other-some of a dark yellow, and some sky-coloured: the last are best, these consistng of many skales (like Unions and Onions) circumvolving one the other, and in which. Nature has exprest farre more excellency, than Arts best inenuity or perfection: for, each inferior skale (not unlike the glorious Orbes inverted) yeelds fresher beauty, and more celestiall splendor than the former: each skale diminishing & being of more vertue, as the Bezar is in tenuity or crassitude. Many are counterfeit. They try them thus, either by pearcing them with hot bodkins; or after they have wayd them, to steep them in cold water foure houres; and if it crack not, tis not feyned: to know it good, they then, wipe it, and ballance it againe; observing, if it weigh never so little above the first weight,  ' tis base and despicable. Note also, that Borneo Bezars are not halfe so valewable as Persia ' s.

Lignum Aloes, from diversity of Countries, varie in their Nomenclatins. The Javans and Malayans name it, Garroo: Indians and Portuguizes, D '  Aquillha, the Chinae, and Cochinchinae, Calamba: fram ' d of large round sticks, of a cloody graine, commixt with ashy veines; no lesse pleasant to the eye, than to the hand ponderous: the relish or taste proves bitter, in its language telling you, It would be burned; for, hot coales of Fyre no sooner touch it, but it incendiates, and (to the honour of its owne Funeall solemnity) expires and breaths out an odor so aromatick and comforble, that no other is used by the Indians, Malayans, Siamites, Peguans; Cambogians, and Borneans, when they incinerate the Carcasses of their most honoured Parents.

Musk, is either yellow, browne, or black: the first is best, last is basest: the choysest yellow shews a deep Amber complection (not unlike Spikeard) cloathed with a reasonable moist skin, sweating out some bristly hayres, without stones, lead, or like adulterate mixtures; of so strong a smell as seemes offensive; but tasted, penetrates a strong braine by its fraor: sweet spices dead it; and put in the mouth, if it suddenly dissolve, or in the hand if it be long a melting; those trialls discover it for bad and imperfect.

Civit, is diversified in colour also: deep yellow (I have beene told) is best, the worst is white, gerasie and sophisticat: how beit, the new is pale, and soone after groweth yellowish.

Benjamin, by the Malayans call ' d Menyan; by other Indians Benyan: is either pure cleare white, or yellow, streaked or coloured; the gum issues from a tree high, small, and furnished with fruitlesse branches; the leaves are not unlike the Olive: Pegu and Siam yeelds the best; Arabia very good; that from Sumatra, Priaman and Barrouse, course, and had: better lik ' d of at Iava, than in England.

Amber, is of so many formes; grey, browne, white, black: grey is best; black is worst; the other two are indifferent. The best sort of grey is pure, interlac ' t with ashie veines, not subject to sinck; and got (as Merhants informe us) in Soffala, Magadoxa, Mombassa, Mosambique, Madagasar Mohelia, Melinde, other parts of Afrique: found there at incertain


