TITLE X.
Of Terrestrial Steams in the Air.

INquiring of an ingenious Acquaintance of mine, who, in an inclosed Scope of Ground, has several Veins of differing Metals and Minerals, whether he did not see, and sometimes smell Steams ascending out of this or that Spot of his Ground, in Circumstances where their Ascension could not be imputed to the Action of the Sun? He and his Son, who was also a Virtuoso, told me, that they had divers times seen as 'twere Pillars of Fumes ascending like Smoak, whereof some would be inodorous, some ill-scented, and some, though but seldom, well-scented. And you may have observed, as well as I, that Fogs, some of which I have known to be very lasting, and to have a large Spread, did require no tender Nostrils to perceive them to stink.

I have frequently observed the smoaking Steams that arose out of the Shafts of Mines not wrought in: And it is certain, the Charcoal made in Cornwal (especially of that Wood that grows in the Mineral Part thereof) doth afford a manifest Arsenical and Sulphureous Smell beyond other Charcoal. N.

Tel est par exemple ce nuage horrible d'une fumée * epaisse qui s'eleva de la mer de Crete au Commencement de l'Este de l'an 721. et qui s'etant repandu dans

l'air le fit paroistre tout en feu. La mer n'en fut pas mesme exempte; car les grosses masses de pierres enflammées qu'on en vit sortier, et qui se joignirent a l'Isle qu' on nomme Hiera, échauferent si fort les eaux qu'elles en bruloient les mains.

TITLE XI.
Of Salts in the Air.

'TIS sufficiently known that the Peripatetick Schools teach the Air to be an Element warm and moist; and if it be an Element, it ought, according to their Principles, and those of the greatest part of other Naturalists, to be a simple and Homogeneous Body. But because such an elementary or uniform Purity is much easier to be found in the Writings of Schoolmen, than amongst the Works of Nature, many of the modern Philosophers have justly forsaken this Doctrine of the elementary Simplicity of the Air in some measure; but perhaps very few of them, if any, have asserted the Air to be so exceedingly compounded a Body, as in my Opinion it really is. For divers of them grant indeed, that the Atmosphere is not absolutely pure, but yet think, that it differs but gradually from true and simple Air, as Water a little moved and troubled does from clear and settled Water.