My attention was first directed to the subject of odours, as connected with colour, during- my attendance at the anatomical rooms in the winter session 1830-1831. During the earlier part of that winter I generally wore a light olive-coloured dress; but happening one day to attend the rooms in black clothes, I was not a little struck by the almost intolerable smell they had acquired. The smell was so very strong as to be remarked even by the family at home, and it was recognised on the same piece of dress for several days. No odour to the same extent had been remarked in the lighter-coloured clothes. The fetid smell which they more or less acquired in the atmosphere of the rooms was comparatively trifling, and slight exposure to the air alone was necessary to deprive them of the odour which they had thus contracted. This circumstance led me to begin a series of experiments, to ascertain, if possible, why different cloths of nearly the same texture, but not of the same colour, should attract odours in proportions so very different. The result was, as I had ventured to conjecture, that the colour of bodies, independent of the nature of the substance, modifies in a striking manner the capability of surfaces for imbibing and giving out odours.
1. I inclosed black and white wool, ten grains of each, in a vessel with a small piece of camphor, and kept it carefully secluded from the light. When examined six hours afterwards, it was at once evident to the sense of smell that the black wool had attracted more of the odorous particles than the white wool, though neither had gained any appreciable weight.
2. I took equal weights of black and white wool, and put them in a small drawer along with a piece of assafcetida; in twenty-four hours the black wool had contracted a strong odour of the gum, while in the white wool, the smell was scarcely perceptible.
3. To try the effect of odours upon a vegetable substance, I took equal quantities of black and white cotton wool, and inclosed them with assafoetida. Two similar quantities were at the same time exposed to the emanations of camphor in another drawer. In both the black-coloured cotton had attracted the
greatest quantity of odorous particles, as palpably evidenced by the smell. These experiments were made in the month of April 1831 ; but it was not till August following that I had an opportunity of extending the investigation to other colours.
4. I inclosed equal weights of black, red, and white wool, in a drawer with assafcetida; and similar quantities of these coloured wools in another drawer with camphor. The result was as before. The black in both experiments had attracted by far the greatest quantity of odorous particles, as evidenced to smell; the red next followed in point of intensity of smell; and the white, so far as could be judged, had attracted least of the odour.
5. The same experiments were tried on cotton of similar colours, and with the same results. Circumstances prevented me from resuming these investigations till the summer of 1832, when I repeated the experiments with a greater variety of coloured substances, in wool, cotton, and silk, and satisfied not only myself but many of my friends, that odour was attracted nearly in the same ratio as caloric, by coloured substances. The experiments were conducted in the same manner as the preceding.
6. I inclosed six different-coloured wools, an equal weight of each, viz. black, blue, green, red, yellow, and white, with assafoetida. They were ranged circularly round the odorous body, without touching it or one another, and were then covered over and excluded from the light. At the end of twenty- four hours they were examined. The black was found to have much the strongest smell of assafoetida; the blue the next; after that the red, and then the green; the yellow had but little smell, and the wrhite scarcely any.
7. A similar experiment, using camphor instead of assafoetida, afforded precisely the same results.
8. Various coloured cottons were treated in the same manner. In all these the smell was invariably found to be of corresponding intensity, according to the colour, as in the wools.
9. Silks of different colours gave the same results.
10. I next endeavoured to ascertain the comparative power of vegetable and animal substances, so far as regards their influence over odours. This was a much more delicate point to ascertain with sufficient accuracy, and free from fallacy, as it was difficult to obtain wool of the same degree of fineness as cotton, the substances I generally preferred for these experiments. I first inclosed equal weights of black and white wool, and black and white cotton, with camphor. After twenty-four hours, the black wool had acquired a stronger smell than the cotton of similar colour; the white wool had also taken up more of the odorous particles than the white cotton, though the odour in both was very feeble.
11. When assafoetida was used in a similar experiment, the odour was much more distinguishable, and it could at once be distinguished by smell, that the wool had taken up much more of the odour than the cotton. Indeed, from many experiments I have made to ascertain this fact, wool appears to have a peculiar attraction for fetid odours. For instance, if, after having allowed wool to lie in contact with camphor for some time, it be afterwards placed, even for a very few hours, near a minute portion of sulphuret of barium (which, it is well known, exhales copiously the fetid odour of sulphuretted hydrogen,) it quickly loses the camphorous smell, and acquires and even retains in considerable intensity the fetid smell of the sulphuret.
It is proper to mention, that in most of these experiments I did not trust to my own olfactory organs alone. All the members of the family, and several of my friends, have lent their aid to distinguish between the different intensities of the odour which each substance had attracted; and though only a few experiments are here detailed, similar ones have been many times performed, with various other odorous substances. The whole of these in their general results seemed to establish the fact, that the colour of substances exerted a peculiar influence over the absorption of odours.
In all these experiments, however, reliance had to be placed upon one sense alone, viz. that of smell, as none of the substances employed had gained any appreciable weight. I was therefore desirous, that, if possible, at least one experiment should be devised, which would show, by the evidence of actual increase of weight, that one colour invariably attracted more of any odorous substance than another; and upon considering the various odorous substances which could be easily volatilized without change, and whose odour was inseparable from the substance, I fixed upon camphor as the one best suited to my purpose. In an experiment of this nature, it was necessary that the camphor should be volatilized or converted into vapour, and that the coloured substances should be so placed as to come in contact with the camphor while in that state.