The Musk Rat. 


In the Memoirs of the French Academy of Sciences 
for the year 1725, there is a complete description of 
piece of cookery , from Holland. 
It comes to England in leaden pots, sewed up in 
canvas : this is of a very deep brick colour, 
and is assuredly nothing else than blood 
dried and mixed up with oil and spirit
(tincture) of true musk.
This sort is frequently sold to the perfumers by pretended
sailors, at so low a price as two or three
shillings per ounce ; whereas, one ounce
of true China musk, at sixteen shillings, is
by far the cheapest, for this quantity of the
true musk is as much as may be supposed
to enter into the composition of a whole
pound of the other.
The true China musk
is of the colour of an old brown nutmeg : it
is generally rolled up, or contained in the
pod, in the form of little round pills, and
has a very strong, fine, and agreeable,
though singular, smell.


The musk imported from China (which,
if possessed of the above characters, is by
far the best) is contained in caddies, or
cabinets, in quantities of from 20 to 50 and
100 ounces, each.
Some, likewise, is
imported from Bengal.


The true Russian musk, in pod, mentioned above, is more loose, and has none


of the round balls or pills, like that from
China.
It has also, with its own proper
perfume, a very distinguishing smell of
urine.


As for the other Russian, or rather Dutch
musk, in pots ; it is generally very moist
and exhales a most disagreeable and predominant ammoniacal smell, whenever the
pots are opened.
This sort is of so little
value, that any thing need hardly be said
about it, further, than that it should never
be used at all.


The Musk Bags , or Pods.


When the musk is taken out of the pod,
the pod may be cut in very small pieces, or
grated very fine by means of a tin grater.

This powder will be of great use in several
perfumery compositions, as will be afterwards directed ; for it has the odour of the
finest parts of the musk, without that of the
disagreeable ingredients which may happen to be present.


