
Ferment oil of Erica vulgaris. The fresh herb is treated as
above, the distillate is cohobated and repeatedly distilled after
addition of common salt, then sliaken up with ether and the ether
carefully distilled off from the dissolved oil. The oil is greenish-yellow, mobile, lighter than water, with a peculiar odour and sweet,
aromatic, huining taste. It reddens litmus paper and burns with
a clear, blue-edged dame without leaving any residue.

Ferment oil of Marrubium vulgare. The comminuted herb
is soaked in water and exposed to the sun, whereby it acquires an
offensive odour ; the liquid is then distilled, the distillate saturated
with common salt ; the flocks thereby separated are collected on a
filter and dissolved in ether and the ether slowly evaporated. The
oil is lighter than water, has a peculiar sweet, ethereaT odour, and
an aromatic, slightly biting taste. It burns without leaving any
residue, “With chlorine water it emits an odour of roses. It
dissolves in aqueous alkalies and in water."

Ferment oil of Achillea millefolium (“ Milfoil ” or common
“ Yarrow ”). The fresh flowering plant is macerated in water and
left to ferment ; the whole is distilled with cohobation. The blue
oil which floats on the distillate is removed ; the residual water,
after addition of common salt, is agitated with ether and the ether
which separates is evaporated off. It is a yellow-brown oil having
a slightly aromatic odour and an aromatic, bitter, rather sharp
taste. It dissolves in alcohol, ether and oils fixed and volatile.

Ferment oil of various species of Plantago. The plantain leaves
are macerated, fermented, and distilled as above, and the distillate
exhausted with ether in the same way. It is a yellow, transparent
oil with an ethereal odour and an aromatic, sweet, burning taste.
It is very volatile. With fuming nitric acid it turns brown, with
rise in temperature. The solution first becomes greenish-yellow,
with milky turbidity, then clear, smells like artificial musk and
has a very bitter taste. It dissolves in alcohol, ether and oils.


Ferment oil of Quercus Robur (the “ Cork Oak ”)• Obtained
from the fresh oak-leaves by fermentation, distillation and treat-
ment of the distillate with ether as above. The oil is pale green.
Sp. gr. 0-695 ; has an agreeable and enlivening odour, and sweet,
burning taste. It reddens litmus and is easily intlamniable, giving
first a bluish, then whitish, non -fuliginous flame which emits a
penetrating odour. With fuming nitric acid it froths up and
becomes very hot, but does not lose its odour. It dissolves
sparingly in water ; rapidly in alcohol, ether, and oils both fixed
and volatile.

Ferment oil of Salix pontandra. (This willow is common in
the North of England and Ireland ; it is remarkable for its large
glossy leaves, more like those of a Portugal Laurel than of the
other willows. Its foliage is fragrant.) The oil is obtained from
the fresh leaves in the same manner as above. It is yellow,
lighter than water, has an agreeable aromatic odour like that of
castoreum and, at the same time, like that of the leaves. It
reddens litmus; smells strongly when heated, and burns with a
very smoky flame, leaving a small quantity of charcoal.

Ferment oil of Tussilago farfara (“Coltsfoot”). The fresh
bruised herb is macerated in water for 10 or 12 days, during
which it turns light green and acquires the odour of pickled
gherkins. The whole is then distilled. The distillate, which has
a vinous odour, is saturated with common salt and re-distilled; this
second distillate is shaken up with a large quantity of ether and
the ether taken off and evaporated, the oil remaining beliind. It
is yellowish, lighter than water, very volatile, has a peculiar,
strongly aromatic, penetrating odour and an aromatic taste neither burning nor cooling. It easily takes fire and burns at
first vith a whitish afterwards with a reddish smoky flame. It  dissolves sparingly in water ; rapidly in alcohol or ether.

Ferment oil of Trifolium fibrini (a species of clover). This
oil is obtained from the dried plant. After the plant has been well
boiled with water and no longer has a bitter smell, by fermentation, distillation, saturating the distillate with common salt and
abstraction by ether as before described. It is pale yellow, lighter
than water, smells strongly aromatic, like the ferment oil of
Tussilago farfara. Its taste is at first burning and sweetish, afterwards aromatic. It burns with a blue, slightly fuliginous flame,
giving off strong smelling vapours which excite coughing, and
leaves a small quantity of charcoal. It dissolves sparingly in
water, easily in alcohol and ether.

Ferment oil of Urtica urens (“The Small Xettle”), obtained as
above, but from the fresh, flowering plant, which during fermentation emits first a vinous, then a sharp and intoxicating odour. It
resembles tlie ferment oil of Echium vulgare.

Ferment oil of Vitis vinifera (the Grape Vine). Fermented
vine leaves are distilled, the distillate cohobated ; the result of the
second distillation abstracted with ether, and after evaporation of
the ether the oil remains as usual. It is pale yellow, lighter than
water, has a peculiar vinous odour like wine-flowers and mignonette,
and a burning, sweetish, aromatic taste. It reddens litmus slightly
but permanently. It evaporates in the air, diffusing a strong
odour. Heated with fuming nitric acid it resinifies and assumes
a grass-green colour. With sulphuric acid it forms first a white,
then a light red, and ultimately a brown mixture, without losing
its odour. It is not deodorised by agitation with chlorine water.
With aqueous potash it forms a clear mixture from whicli the oil
afterwards separates with red-brown colour, but with its original
odour. It dissolves sparingly in water, abundantly in alcohol,
ether and fixed oils. With oil of turpentine and oil of lemon it
forms at first a milky solution, which afterwards becomes clear. 

