Snuff Perfum ' d with Flowers.
THE Flowers much used for Perfuming Snuff, are Orange-flower water, Jasmin, common Roses, musqued Roses and Tuberoses, other Flowers can hardly Perfume naturally, unless you use a great quantity of them, and add to them some Essence of the same Flowers, as you ' ll see in the Receipts for Perfuming Snuff; but when all is done the smell never last long, as in other Perfumes. Here is the manner how to use them in Perfuming Snuff.

Get a Wooden Box, as big as you have occasion for, line within with dry Paper, lay in it a Bed of Snuff an Inch thick, then a Bed of Flowers, and so

along till you have no more of it; let it lay so in the Flowers Twenty four Hours: then searce your Snuff, to take out the Flowers, and renew them at the same time; continue so doing four or five days; and when you think your Snuff is Perfum ' d enough with Flowers, keep it very close in your Boxes, in a very dry place; don ' t meddle with it when the Flowers are within, because it will not heat.

Another manner of Perfuming Snuff with Flowers.
GET a good quantity of Sheets of Paper dryed before the Fire, of the bigness and shape or thereabouts of your Boxes; prick them all over with a big Pin; then to Perfume your Snuff with Flowers, lay a Bed of them an Inch thick in the Box; and over one Sheet of that Paper, and over the Paper a Bed of Flowers, and another sheet of Paper over the Flowers; lay over that sheet another Bed of Snuff, and continue so doing till you have none left: So the Flowers are between two Papers, and the Snuff too, without touching the Flowers; and

by that means the Snuff takes naturally the Smell of the Flowers, because the same Smell is not corrupted or alter ' d by the Snuff. Change your Flowers according to the Plenty you have of them; and when you take them out, take up only the sheets of Paper, and pass your Snuff through a fine hair Sieve to let your Snuff through and keep in the Flowers. Flower it so four or five days, and  ' tis done.

Snuff perfum ' d with Buds of Roses.
TAKE as much Buds of Roses as you will, pluck out the green knots, and in their room put as many Cloves: Then throw them in a Glass-bottle well stopt, expose the Bottle to the hot sun three Weeks or a Month; you may use them after to perfume your Snuff, being cleansed they will give a very sweet Smell to it.

Snuff perfum ' d with a great many sorts of Flowers.
NOthing else is to be done, but to mix together Snuff perfum ' d with several

sweet Flowers, and to prepare it so well by more or less of it, that you can hardly discern which Smell prevails, and  ' tis done.

The manner of making Snuff in Grains of different bigness.
GET several sorts of Sieves, some of thin others of very thick Cloth, and so according to the courseness of your Cloth, you ' ll make the Grains of your Snuff in passing it through; you must not searce it but when it is perfum ' d with Flowers.

Fine Spanish Snuff.
THE true Spanish Snuff is very fine and redish, to make it take red Snuff in Grains, beat it in a Mortar, and pass it very fine through a Sieve; and being cleansed before it is colour ' d, as I prescribe in the beginning of this Treatise, perfume it only with Flowers, then with some Spanish Perfume or other, and  ' tis done.

To perfume Snuff well, it is not enough to perfume it with Flowers, you must use other Perfumes; it is true, being only

perfum ' d with Flowers, it may be good to be perfumed with the Perfumes we mention hereafter: I leave it to every ones Fancy, I ' ll say only this, That the Smell of Flowers does very well, mixt with the most sweet and precious Smells, and that they are of a stronger and more lasting Vertue.

