All those who have travelled in that season on
the coast of Genoa will no doubt remember what
charming bouquets and garlands are made of the cassie
intermixed with other flowers. To perfumers it is a
most valuable assistant, possessing in the highest degree
a fresh floral fragrance, which
renders it highly useful in
compounds. It bears some
resemblance to the violet, and,
being much stronger, is often
used to fortify that scent,
which is naturally weak.

The cassie requires a very
dry soil, well exposed to the
sun’s rays. The tree does
five or six years old. The
yield varies from 1 lb. to 20 lbs. for every tree, according to age and position.   The blossoms are gathered
three times a week after sunrise: a very strong oil
and pomade is obtained from them by maceration. In
Africa, and principally in Tunis, an essential oil of
cassie is made, which is sold at about £4 per ounce; but
French and Italian flowers are not sufficiently powerful
to yield an essence.

The violet is one of the most charming odours in
nature, and well might Shakspeare exclaim—

"Sweet thief, whence didst thou steal thy sweet that smells.
If not from my lore’s breath ?"

It is a scent which pleases all, even the most delicate
and nervous, and it is no wonder that it should be in
such universal request. The largest and almost only
violet plantations have hitherto been at Nice, its exceptional position rendering it the most available spot for
them. The species used is the double Parma violet
(Viola odorata). It requires a very cool and shady
ground, and is generally placed in the orange and
citron groves, at the foot of the trees, which screen it
with their thick foliage from the heat of the sun. It
flowers from the beginning of February to the middle
of April, and each plant yields but a few ounces of
blossoms, which are culled twice a week after sunrise.

Jonquil (Narcissus jonquila), and narcissus (Narcissus
odor at a), are two bulbous plants which are also cultivated for perfumery purposes, but in much smaller
quantities than any of those already mentioned, their
peculiar aroma rendering their use limited. The former
is to be found chiefly in the south of France, and the
latter in Algeria. Mignonnette, lilac, and hawthorn
are also sometimes worked into pomades, but on such
a small scale that they are not worth mentioning. The
extracts named after those flowers are generally produced by combination.

The herbal series comprises all aromatic plants, such
as lavender, spike, peppermint, rosemary, thyme, marjoram, geranium, patchouly, and wintergreen, which
yield essential oils by distillation.
Lavender was extensively used by the Romans in
their baths, whence it derived its name. It is a nice,
clean scent, and an old and deserving favourite. 