VPon the top of your glasse bodie, straine a haire cloth, and vpon that lay good store of Roseleaues, either drie, or halfe drie, and so your water will ascend verie good both in smell and in colour. Distill either in balneo, or in a gentle fire in ashes, you may rei¦terate the same water vppon fresh leaues. This may also be done in a leaden Still, ouer which by reason of the breadth you may place more leaues.

19. An excellent wvy to make the extract of all Vegetables.
EXpresse a good quantity of the iuice thereof, set it on the fire, and giue it onely a walme or two, then it will grow cleere: before it be cooled, pour away the cleerest, filter with a peece of cotton, and then euaporate your filtred iuyce, till it come to a thicke substance, and thus you shal haue a most excellent extracte of the Rose, Gilloflower, &c. with the perfect sent and taste of the flower, whereas the common waie is to make the extracte eyther by spirit of wine faire water, the water of the plant, or some kind of menstruum.

20. To make a water smelling of the Eglantine, Gilloflowers, &c.
DRie the hearbe or flower, and distill the same in faire water
in a limbecke, draw no longer then you find sent in the water that issueth, reiterate that water vpon fresh herbes, and distil as before, diuiding the sweetest from the rest.

21. A Scottish hand water.
PVt thyme, Lauender, and Rosemary confusedly together, then make a lay of thicke wine Lees in the bottom of a stone pot, vppon which make an other laye of the said hearbes, & then a lay of Lees, and so forwarde, lute the pot wel, bury it in the ground for 6. weeks distill it, & it is called Dames water in Scotland. A little therof put into a bason of a comon water ma¦keth very sweet washing water.

22. How to draw the bloud of hearbes.
STampe the hearb, put the same into a large glasse, leauing two parts emptie (some commend the
iuice of the hearbe onely) nip or else lute the glasse very wel, digest it in balneo. 15. or 16. daies, and you shall finde the same very red, diuide the watrish part, and that which remaineth is the bloud or essence of the hearb.

23. Rosewater, and yet the Roseleaues not discoloured.
YOu must distill in balneo, and when the bottom of your pewter Still is through hotte, put in a fewe leaues at once and distill them: watch your Still carefully, and as soone as those are distilled put in more. I know not whether your profit will requite your labour, yet accept of it as a newe conclusion.

24. How to recouer Rosewater, or any other distilled water that hath gotten a mother, and is in daunger to be musty.
INfuse your water vpon fresh Rose leaues, or vpon Rose cakes broken all in peeces, and then after maceration for three or foure houres with a gentle fire, redistill your water. Do this in a Limbeck, take heed of drawing too long for burning, vnlesse your Limbecke stand in balneo.

25. To drawe both good Rosewater, and oyle of Roses together.
AFter you haue digested your Rose leaues by the speace of 3. moneths, sicut ante, num. 13. eyther in barrels or hookers, then distill the with faire water in a limbeck, draw so long as you finde anie excellent smell of the Rose, then diuide the fatty oile that fleeteth on the top of the Rose water, and so you haue both excellent oile of Roses, and also good Rosewater togither, and you shall also haue more water then by the ordinarie
way, and this Rosewater extendeth farther in physicall compositions, and the other serueth best for perfumes  and casting bottles. You may also distill the oyle of Linum Rhodtum this way, sauing that you shall not neede to macerate the same aboue 24 houres in your water or menstruum before you distill: this oyle hath a most pleasing smell in a manner equall with the oyle of Roses.

