It will
be readily seen that night-time is the most
favourable for the retention of scent, as
evaporation does not take place so rapidly
then, and this, of course, as I have shown,
is why dogs are more especially useful at this
time. It is even possible to track a fairly
recent trail on certain roads at night in spite
of the hard surface, and a quite recent trail
on pavement, always supposing these have
not been fouled too much by other footsteps.
Strongly scented ground makes tracking
difficult, as the animal or human scent is
overpowered : thus clover fields, or any
highly scented crops, and manured fields,
are decided drawbacks.

Newly ploughed fields are unprofitable
tracking-ground, the reason being that the
turned - up earth has a strong aromatic
odour of its own, apart from that of the
chemicals, &c., that may have been previously put into it.

Now with regard to the scent left by a
man, much interesting speculation arises as
to whether the dog works entirely by foot
scent, or if he depends as well on body scent,
and if so, how much. As yet, all experiments by experts have not to any extent
given us a decided answer on this point.
I here give an account of some interesting
experiments which Dr Romanes carried out.
“ On one occasion Dr Romanes put a most
intelligent bitch to a crucial test. He
walked for fifty yards in his ordinary
shooting-boots ; then he walked a hundred
yards in his stockings, and completed another hundred yards on his bare feet. The
bitch followed the first part of the trail
at full speed.

“ Changing the experiments, he soaked
his ordinary shooting - boots with oil of
aniseed, and walked with these over the
park. Strange to say, this strong odour
did not interfere with the bitch’s scent,
for it ran him down as quickly as before.

“ Accordingly, this keen observer came to
the conclusion that his setter distinguished
his trail from that of all others by the
peculiar smell of his boots, and not by the
particular scent of his feet or body. The
exudations from his feet required to be combined with shoe-leather, and brown paper
can stop the transmission of that scent.”

I give the above quotation with all due
deference to such a renowned authority ;
but I myself, from my own experiments,
am not prepared to accept, without
reserve, all he says, as my experience goes
to show that a trail run in stockinged feet,
or bare feet, is more favourable for tracking
than that run in boots. My own opinion
is, that the dog goes both by foot scent
on the ground and also by body scent,
when this latter scent is there, and I think
that this is another reason why tracking
in the evening or at night is so much easier
for the dog. The air at this time being
both moist and still, the fugitive’s body
scent remains suspended in the air as he
goes along, and this is a great additional
aid to the dog. 