
This erroneous opinion appears to have been based on the effects
occasionally produced by the poison on animals: it is not in any
way supported by observations on man.

The evidence derivable from the taste and odour of this poison is,
in some instances, of importance. The taste is described by Dr.
Christison as pungent ; some state that it is hot, others that it is
bitter. (Pereira.) In one fatal case (December 1856) deceased
complained, on swallowing about two drachms of the poison by
mistake, that it had a bitter taste. When the common acid is mixed with organic liquids, a taste is not likely to be perceptible unless the dose is large.

With regard to the odour, Dr. Christison states that when
diffused, it has a distant resemblance to that of bitter almonds ;
but it is accompanied with a peculiar impression of acridity on
the nostrils and back of the throat. (Op. cit. 752.) Orfila also
says that it is similar to that of bitter almonds : — this is, indeed,
the common impression. There is, however, a difference between
these odours ; but the difference is not perceptible to the senses
of all, and the only practical point requiring notice is, that the
diluted odour of bitter almonds would probably be pronounced by
many persons to indicate the presence of prussic acid, especially
if there existed any suspicion of violent death. Even experienced
medical men have to my knowledge been deceived on this point.
There are some who are unable to perceive the odour of prussic
acid when it exists in large proportion, whether mixed with water
or other liquids ; while others, again, are peculiarly susceptible
of it. With some, it does not affect the olfactory nerves at all,
but produces merely a sense of constriction in the throat. These
facts appear to me to explain, — why, on being called to a case of
poisoning by this acid, or during the examination of a body,
some medical men perceive the odour while others do not.
When many have to
form a judgment on this subject, it is much
more common to find disagreement than unanimity. In a case
seen by Dr. Christison, in which a man had swallowed a large
dose of prussic acid, there was no odour in the breath, near the
patient, nor in any part of the room. Two persons could not
perceive any odour in six ounces of the warm fluid freshly
drawn from the stomach by the pump. (Ed. Month. Journal,
Eeb. 1850, p. 97.) On other occasions the odour may be concealed by peppermint, tobacco, or other odours. In a case communicated to me in May 1850, by Mr. Rake, a man swallowed
a large dose of prussic acid, and was observed walking and
smoking a pipe. He was found dead in a privy very shortly
afterwards ; but although the body was still warm, the smell of
tobacco-smoke from the mouth completely overpowered and
concealed the odour of prussic acid. On opening the body, the
smell of the acid was at once perceptible.


