Selection of passages from 18th century plays and discussions of theatre smells

William Burnaby, The ladies visiting-day. A comedy. As it was acted at the Theatre in Lincolns-Inn-Fields, (London: , 1701)
Your ladyship may observe in this suddain change, how odious is an old fashion; we are ready to swoon, now when anybody comes Perfum’d among us; and it looks like a citizens dowdy daughter, roll’d up in sweets like a pastielle, and only Thames Street now smells of musk and civit.

The Tricks of the Town laid open: Or, a Companion for the country gentleman (London, 1746), pp. 10-11.
There you’ll find some clapping and stamping, others hissing and scoffing, and perhaps both without any reason. There you’ll see a cock horse on the seats, damning and confounding the play and players, they know not why or for what; others throwing about their wigs, and almost blinding you with the nauseous scents of their perfumes and pulvilios; others prating with orange wenches, or bantering with whores; and what’s more probable, the whores bantering of them.

George Anne, Bellamy, An apology for the life of George Anne Bellamy, late of Covent-Garden Theatre. Written by herself.(London, 1785, 5vols), III, pp. 85-6.
And notwithstanding it happened to be a very wet afternoon, a great concourse of people for the second gallery attended. As soon as that part of the house was full, she disposed of the overflow in the boxes and up on the stage; wisely preferring their two shillings a piece to empty benches. The heat of the house occasioned the wet clothes of the dripping audience to send forth odours not quite so sweet as those of Arabia. 
Not being accustomed to such effluvia, I gave preference to lavender water, with which I impregnated my handkerchief, and held it to my face. Mr Ross, who played Alexander, happened that night to be in one of his active dispositions, and intending to do the part justice, which was full in his power, when he did not chuse to walk over the course, he enquired why I hid my face from him whilst he was paying homage to my queenship. I as usual, played satire which I answered, that I did it because I was just suffocated with the stench; the people smelling so of tripe that they were horrible offensive.
The gentleman, out of humour at my delicacy put what I had uttered into his own tramontane language, and told the lovely Roxanna that I had said that her audience stunk. Enraged at so great a indignity thrown on such a a number of her worthy friends, who had endangered their lives, from being we to the skin in order to pay their respects to her, she formed a resolution to mortify me in my turn.

‘On Affectation’, The Town and Country Magazine, Or Universal Repository of Knowledge, Instruction, and Entertainment, Volume 10 1778, p. 197
I was the other evening at the rout of a lady of some consequence at the west end of the town, and during a party of quadrille, the conversation turned upon the company that were the night before at the opera. Lady Annabella S- declared that notwistanding all the encomiums that had been paid on the duchess of D-, she was a perfect fright. Heaves! What a head! Tittering all night with Colonel S-, and laughing out loud in the midst of some of the most favourite airs, yet she is pronounced a prodigy – she is indeed a prodify of coquetry and affectation; for my part, Miss, (addressing her next neighbour), I make it a rule positive at a public place, never to go beyond a simple. Well, but, said lady R-, how would you have been motified had you been seated as I was next to a packer’s wife from Thames-Street? The odour of tar and pitch was so strong, that I had like to have fainted. I was obliged to keep my smelling bottle to mynose the whole night, and though it was the best eau de luce Warren sells, Mrs. L- was still far predominant. My dear lady, cried Miss V-n, your mortification was trivial to mine the other night in the front-box at Drury-lane. Down squatted alderman G- upon the same seat: I soon found from his conversation with his wife, that he had been at a city feast; but he needed not to have confirmed it with his tongue, his cloaths sufficiently revealed it; he smelt so insufferably of tobacco that I was obliged to withdraw before the end of the first act, or the consequences would have been fatal to me. 
