For as the Heathen Epictetus tels vs, wee try a man as wee try money. What figure or stampe hath this coine? Traianes? Then bring it. Neroes? Away with is, it is adulterate, sophisticate, wicked. So is it in the tryall of a man. What figure and stampe doe his purposes and practises carry? Is hee mercifull, meeke, humble, gentle, sociable, patient, a louer of all men? Bring him, I allowe him, I admit him, and him onely for a man, and companion with God. But see hee haue not Neroes characters, or Nebuchadnezzars, or Ahabs, or Ieroboams. Is hee dissolute, riotous, vaine, luxarious an vncleane person? Is he proud, haughty, high-minded? Is hee angry? Is hee a pursuer of enmities? Is hee froward? Doth hee reuenge himselfe of such as offend him, when hee gets opportunity? Is hee an apparent impenitent wicked liuer in any grosse
sinne? What then? Wilt thou say this is a man? Surely no. Quiduis potius quàm homo; He is rather any thing then a man: but a man hee is not. Wilt thou say, that all things are iudged of by their formes? If that bee so, then thou mayest call a lumpe of waxe or clay an apple, because it is round like an apple: thou mayest say, it hath the smell and taste of an apple. But the outwarde circumscription and attendants are not sufficient; it is not a nose, or an eye, or the like, that are sufficient to constitute a man: For humane purposes, and vertuous and noble actions, are required to make a man. This man heares not wholsome admonitions when he is reproued, he vnderstands not the things that belong to his peace, to his saluation: shall wee say he is a man,? No, hee is an asse: his shamefastnesse and modesty is dead, hee is vnprofitable, hee is any thing rather then a man. Another there is, who seekes with
whom hee may quarrell, whom hee may spurne and contemne. Therefore is neither a sheep nor an asse. What then? Fera bestia, A wilde, bruite, sauage beast? It is not then the shape & image of a man that makes a man, but the image of God in man, his vertuous inclinations, and resolute executions of good purposes. If he haue the stamp of vertue and holinesse, of mercy and goodnes, he is a man; if not, he is so much lesse then a man, as a good man is more then a beast. If this were truely disgested, it would make thousands of such as onely carry the names and shapes of men, to be much ashamed of themselues. For what should make the profane and godlesse persons of the world, who will not be acquainted with goodnes at all, to blush, if this doe not? That wheras they thinke themselues to bee the onely braue men of this world, they are in true account with God himselfe) who is Optimus
rerum aestimator, The best iudge of all things) and also with all good men, esteemed as the dung of the streetes, and as salt that hath lost his saltnesse, which is good for nothing but to bee troden vnder foot.

The Prodigall is a true embleme of a voluptuous, impenitent man, turned out of the nature of man into a swine and brute beast. For Christ tels vs, hee was set to feede swine. And to feede is vsually taken to recreate and delight: Oculos pictura pascit inani, Hee fed his eyes in beholding a vaine picture. So that to feede swine, is as much, as by the filthinesse of sinnes to delight and feed diuels: sinne beeing truely the diuels food: drunkennesse, vncleanesse, luxurie, and all other vices (in the opinion of the learned) no better but the diuells dainty dishes: All of vs so long feeding swine, as we doe by our sinnes please the diuell, or doe such things as the diuell reioiceth
at. For as the meate of Christ is to doe his Fathers will, so it is the diuels meate, to doe his will.

And therefore our Sauiour might well call the impenitent vicious vngodly man a swine, not fitte to haue pearles cast before him: for as from the swine comes no good, neither milke as from the cow, nor wooll as from the sheepe, nor faithfull seruice as from the dogge, nor obedience as from the horse, nor bearing of burdens as from the asse, nor tillage as from the oxe: as the swine giues no cotentment to him that feeds it, as the horse doth by his pace, the dogge by his hunting, the hawke by his fowling: so the voluptuous carnall man is good for nothing; neyther hath God, who filles his bellie with his infinite treasures daily, any pleasure in him, or seruice from him.

So that the wicked and vngodly sinner lying in his stinking pleasures, is truely a swine wallowing
in the filthy puddle, as a filthy as aswine, as gluttonous as a swine, delighting in dirt as a swine, not smelling the stinke of his sin any more then the swine doth the stinke of the dirt it wallowes in. And yet no dung stinks so much in our nostrels, as sinne doth in the nostrels of God. And therefore the Scripture speaking of impenitent sinners, tels vs that the carcasse of Iezabel should be as dung on the ground; and because they had sinned against the Lord, their flesh shall bee as the dung: the wicked becoming as the dung of the earth. Whereby we vnderstand, that no hot reeking dung, or filthy stinking carcasse cast out into the chanell, is so odious to our sight and smell, as the impenitent sinner is in the sight & nostrels of God and Angels. And so foule is the stinke of infull soules, as a godly Father obserues, that therefore Christ at the last iudgement shall shake them off with that irreuocable, depart from me, as not being able to endure their smell, no not so long as they shall bee a iudging. And as the vngodly are swine in these respects, so as Swine are choaked with the smell of roses, as they chew not their meate, as they are vnrofitable for all seruices, such are the voluptuous and carnall men for all the world; to heare or see any good or godly thing doth choake them, they neuer ruminate and consider the Law of God, they are good for no worke of piety or religion, hauing no more Soule then swine haue.