It does not seem necessary to enter here into the
theological meaning of each separate act of censing, all no
doubt are the result of the teaching of the Spirit of God ; but
there is one point of such great antiquity, and of such singular
pathos, that it should not be omitted. Of course it will be
remembered how usually, almost universally, in the primitive
Church, the martyrs were buried under the Altar, and so it
came about that the Priest, while censing the Altar at the
South end, stooped down and censed the feet of the dear
servant of Christ, and then again his head, when he was cpme
to the North, and the whole body as he passed back from
North to South. The bodies of the Saints are but rarely there
now, but the Church has continued her method of censing,
wrapping all, both quick and dead, in the all availing inter
cession of Her Great Head.

It is no part of our intention to claim a Scriptural authority,
or suggestion even, of every detail of the present method of
using Incense in the Christian Church. We distinctly affirm
with St. Thomas (vide loc. cit.) that its use does not rest upon
the authority of the Mosaic law, but upon that of the Christian
Church alone. We are ready to admit with many of the
learned, among whom may be numbered Aquinas, De Vert,
and Scudamore (against others of equal learning), that the
desire of producing a sweet smell in a place which otherwise
would have been foul, may have had something to do with its
introduction into the Christian Church, as it undoubtedly had
something to do with its being ordered by Moses for use in
the Tabernacle made of skins.

We affirm, with Tertullian,
that we use Incense in a fashion different from the heathen, to
wit in a swinging censer, and not in a standing vessel, as the
Pagans did. We are of opinion that the censing of persons
and things is the only method of using Incense which is
distinctly Christian ; and finally we deny that it is possible to
find in this custom of the Church (be its antiquity what it may)
any superstition, or the setting forth of any doctrine other than
the perfect sufficiency of the Sacrifice of Calvary, and the need
of all being gathered in one through the intercession of the
Eternal Victim, which for a sweet savour rises before the
Mercy Seat on High.