ESSAY.
SO prouident hath that great workeman bin of all his creatures, as no delight euen in this Tabernacle of earth, is wanting to make him more accomplished: and though the fiue Sences (as that deuout Barnard obserueth) be those fiue gates, by which the world doth besiege vs, the Deuill doth tempt vs, and the flesh ensnare vs; yet in euery one of these, if rightly employed, is there a peculiar good and benefit redounding to the comfort of the soule, no lesse than to the auaile and vtilitie of the bodie.
For euen by the Smell, as by the conduit, by which is conveyed vnto vs the dilated fountaine of Gods mercie,
doe we apprehend all varieties of flowers, sootes, sweetes: which moued the Philosopher to terme this Sence, the Harbinger of the Spring.
Some are of opinion, that this peculiar Sence, is an occasion of more danger to the body than benefit, in that it receiues crude and vnholesome vapours, foggie and corrupt exhalations, being subiect to any infection; it is true: but what especiall delights confers it for one of these inconveniences; cheering the whole bodie with the sweetest odours, giuing libertie to the vitall powers, which otherwise would be imprisoned, delight to her fellow-Sences, which else would be dulled, and the sweet breathing ayre, which by her is reciued: all these (as so many arguments of consequence) bring vs to a more exact acknowledgment of this Sences excellencie.
The Smelling is termed

the vnnecessariest of all other Sences, yet may it be employed in cases of necessitie; witnesse Democritus, who against the celebration of the feast Buthysia, fasted nine dayes, sustayning nature onely with the smell of hot bread.
This Sence of mine shall not be subiected to outward delicacies: Let the Courtier smell of perfumes, the sleeke-fac ' d Lady of her paintings, I will follow the smell of my Sauiours oyntments: how should I be induced, following the direction of reason, by such soule-bewitching vanities, which rather peruert the refined lustre of the minde, than adde the least of perfection to so excellent an essence? No, let Pigmalion dote on his owne picture, Narcissus on his shape, Niobe on her numerous progenie; my Taste, shall be to taste how sweet the Lord is; my Touch, the apprehension of his loue; my
sight, the contemplation of his glory; my eare, to accent his praise; my smell, to repose in the faire and pleasant pastures of his word.
O comfort truly styled one; in that my soule transported aboue herselfe, vnites her selfe to be ioyned to her Redeemer.
The Gardens of the Hesperides warded and guarded by those three daughters of Atlas, were pleasant; the Gardens of Lucullus fragrant; the Groue of Ida eminent; yet not comparable to those exquisite pleasures, which the diuine pastures comprehend; there is that hedged Garden, that sealed Well, that Bethesda, that Eden, that Syloe; here may the delight of euery Sence be renewed; the thirstie satisfied, the hungry filled, the sicke cured, the labourer cheered, and the exquisite mirrour of all perfection; torrent of euer-flowing bounties, Iessaes branch, Aarons rod, and that flowrie

garden of Engaddi represented.
There is mel in ore, melos in aure, iubilus in corde; honie to the taste, melodie to the eare, and harmonie to the heart; honie which breedes no loathing, melodie which is neuer discording, harmonie euer agreeing.
This it is to be ioyned to an heau ' nly spouse, sending from Paradice pomgranats, with the fruits of apples; Cypresse, Nard, Nard and Saffron,* Fistula, and Cinnamon, with all the woods of Libanon, Mirrh and Aloës, with the best oyntments.
What excellent delights be here proposed? what exquisite comforts ministred? it is sufficient for me to admire them in this pilgrimage, enioying them by contemplation, which after many pilgrim dayes I shall possesse in fruition.
There is no Pomander to smell at, like the oyntment of my Sauiour: he is all sweet, all comfort, all

delight; sweet in his mercy, comfortable in his promise, and delightfull in his presence; in his mercy a father, in his comfort a redeemer, and in his delight a replenisher; from his mercy and compassion is deriued abundantly fulnes of consolation, from his comfort or promise, an assured expectation, and from his delight, of himselfe a plenarie possession.
O would to God with happy Ioseph, I had taken downe my Sauiour from the crosse, embalmed him in the spices or graces of my soule, had layen him in the new sepulchre of my heart, that at least attending or following my IESVS, my obedience might haue ministred something to so heauenly obsequies.
For how should I think but by the smell of his oyntments, my sin-sicke and soule soiled conscience should be cured, who had power to raise dead Lazarus stinking
in his graue, hauing bene foure dayes buried? O that I might goe to the mountaine of Myrrh,* to the hill of Frankincense, to be ioyned to him, whose oyntments are aboue all spices: how should I want any thing being so enriched? how should I feare any thing being so armed? or how wish any thing, hauing whatsoeuer I desired? Sweet-smelling perfume of selected vertues, pure streame of diuine graces, and amiable beauty neuer blemished; no delight shall withhold me, no affection seduce me, no inordinate pleasure entice me, no sweet smell draw me; I haue tyed my selfe to my spouse in all my Sences; being He, that ministers refreshment to all my Sences. 