Lobsters and Crabs , though exceedingly different in
figure, have propensities and habits of great similarity.
They annually cast their shells, and obtain new ones,
completely hardened, in little more than forty-eight
hours. They are extremely fierce and voracious, but
when they chance to lose a limb in their frequent combats, it is completely renewed in about three weeks.

If a lobster be new, it has a pleasant scent at that
part of the tail which joins to the body, and the tail
will, when opened, fall smart, like a spring; but when
stale, it has a rank scent, and the tail limber and flagging. If it be spent, a white scurf will issue from the
mouth and roots of the small legs. If it be full, the
tail, about the middle, will be full of hard reddish
skinned meat, which you may discover by thrusting a
knife between the joints, on the bend of the tail. The
heaviest are best, if there be no water in them. The
cock is generally smaller than the hen, of a deeper
red when boiled, has no spawn or seed under its tail,
and the uppermost fins within its tail are stiff and
hard.

Lobsters are in season during the summer months.

Cray Fish — should be chosen by the same rules as
lobsters.

Crabs . — The heaviest are best, whether small or
large, and those of a middling size are sweetest. If
light they are watery ; when in perfection the joints of
the legs are stiff, and the body has a very agreeable
smell. The eyes look dead and loose when stale.

Prawns and Shrimps , if they are hard and stiff, of a
pleasant scent, and their tails turned strongly inward,
are new ; but if they are limber, their colour faded, of
a faint smell, and feel slimy, they are stale.

Oysters . — The oysters of this country are unlike
those of some others ; a single one of which, it has
been said, will serve several persons for a meal. With
us, the smallest kinds, particularly those termed Natives, which come into season rather later than the
others, are generally the sweetest. For eating raw,
the native is indeed preferable to all others. The
rock oyster is the largest, and suits admirably for
stewing, &c. ; but if eaten raw, it usually has a coarse
and strong flavour.

