It may be distinguished from them by its very acid taste and its shape, which is that of needle-formed crystals, each of which, if put into a drop of ink, will turn it to a reddish brown, whereas Epsom salts will not change its colour at all.
When a large dose of this poison has been taken, death takes place very quickly indeed. Symptoms produced in those who have swallowed it.
A hot, burning, acid taste is felt in the act of swallowing, and vomiting of a greenish-brown fluid is produced, sooner or later, according to the quantity and strength of the poison taken.
There is great tenderness felt over the stomach, followed by clammy perspirations and convulsions; the legs are often drawn up, and there is generally stupor, from which the patient, however, can easily be roused, and always great prostration of strength.
The pulse is small and weak, and the breathing faint.—Treatment.
Chalk or magnesia, made into a cream with water, should be given in large quantities, and afterwards the emetic draught above prescribed, or some mustard-and-water, if the draught cannot be got.
The back part of the throat to be tickled with a feather, to induce vomiting.
Arrowroot, gruel, and the like drinks, are to be taken.
When the prostration of strength is very great and the body cold, warmth is to be applied to it, and a little brandy-and-water, or sal-volatile and water, given.

2653.
Prussic Acid (a thin, transparent, and colourless liquid, with a peculiar smell, which greatly resembles that of bitter almonds).—Symptoms produced in those who have swallowed it.
These come on immediately after the poison has been taken, and may be produced by merely smelling it.
The patient becomes perfectly insensible, and falls down in convulsions—his eyes are fixed and staring, the pupils being bigger than natural, the skin is cold and clammy, the pulse scarcely perceptible, and the breathing slow and gasping.—Treatment.
Very little can be done in these cases, as death takes place so quickly after the poison has been swallowed, when it takes place at all.
The best treatment—which should always be adopted in all cases, even though the patient appears quite dead-is to dash quantities of cold water on the back, from the top of the neck downwards.
Placing the patient under a pump, and pumping on him, is the best way of doing this.
Smelling-salts are also to be applied to the nose, and the chest well rubbed with a camphor liniment.

2654.
ALKALIS: Potash, Soda, and Ammonia, or common Smelling-Salts, with their principal preparations—Pearlash, Soap Lees, Liquor Potassae, Nitre, Sal Prunella, Hartshorn, and Sal—Volatile.—Alkalis are seldom taken or given with the view of destroying life.
They may, however, be swallowed by mistake.—Symptoms produced in those who have swallowed them.
There is at first a burning, acrid taste in, and a sensation of tightness round, the throat, like that of strangling; the skin touched is destroyed; retching mostly followed by actual vomiting, then sets in; the vomited matters often containing blood of a dark brown colour, with little shreds of flesh here and there, and always changing vegetable blue colours green.
There is now great tenderness over the whole of the belly.
After a little while, great weakness, with cold, clammy sweats, a quick weak pulse, and purging of bloody matters, takes place.
The brain, too, mostly becomes affected.—Treatment.
Give two tablespoonfuls of vinegar or lemon-juice in a glassful of water every few minutes until the burning sensation is relieved.
Any kind of oil or milk may also be given, and will form soap when mixed with the poison in the stomach.
Barley-water, gruel, arrowroot, linseed-tea, &c., are also very useful, and should be taken constantly, and in large quantities.
If inflammation should take place, it is to be treated by applying leeches and warm poppy fomentations to the part where the pain is most felt, and giving two tablespoonfuls of the fever mixture every four hours.
The diet in all these cases should only consist of arrowroot or gruel for the first few days, and then of weak broth or beef-tea for some time after.

2655.
When very strong fumes of smelling-salts have in any way been inhaled, there is great difficulty of breathing, and alarming pain in the mouth and nostrils.
In this case let the patient inhale the steam of warm vinegar, and treat the feverish symptoms as before.