Isop is reasonable long lasting: young roots are good set, slips better. A good pot-hearbe. 
 
Iuly-flowers, commonly called Gilly-flowers, or Cloue-Iuly-flowers (I call them so, because they flowre in Iuly) they haue the name of Cloues, of their sent. I may well call them the King of flowers (except the Rose) and the best sort of them are called Queene-Iuly flowers. I haue of them nine or ten seuerall colours, and diuers of them as big as Roses: of all flowers (saue the Damaske Rose) they are the most pleasant to sight and smell: they last not past three or foure yeeres vnremoued. Take the sl•ps (without shanks) aud set any time, saue in extreme frost, but especially at Michael tide. Their vse is much in ornament, and conforting the spirits, by the sence of smelling. 
 
Iuly flowers of the wall, or wall-Iuly-flowers wall-flowers, or Bee-flowers, or Winter-Iuly-flowers, because 

 
growing in the walles, euen in Winter, and good for Bees, will grow euen in stone walls, they will seeme dead in Summer, and yet reuiue in Winter. They yeeld seed plentifully, which you may sow at any time, or in any broken earth, especially on the top of a mud-wall, but moist, you may set the root before it be brancht, euery slip that is not flowr ' d will take root, or crop him in Summer, and he will flower in Winter: but his Winter-seed is vntimely. This and Palmes are exceeding good, and timely for Bees. 
 
Leekes yeeld seed the second yeere, vnremoued and die, vnlesse you remoue them, vsuall to eate with salt and bread, as Onyons alwaies greene, good pot-hearb, euill for the eyes. 
 
Lauendar Spike would be remoued within 7 yeeres, or eight at the most. Slips twined as Isop and Sage, would take best at Michael-tide. This flower is good for Bees, most comfortable for smelling, except Roses: and kept dry, is as strong after a yeere, and when it is gathered. The water of this is comfortable. 
 
White Lauendar would be remoued sooner. 
 
Lettice yeelds seed the first yeere, and dyes: sow betime, and if you would haue them Cabbage for Sallets, remoue them as you doe Cabbage. They are vsuall in Sallets, and the pot. 
 
Lillies white and red, remoued once in three or foure yeeres their roots yeeld many Sets, like the Garlicke, Michael-tide is the best: they grow high, after they get roote: these roots are good to breake a Byle, as are Mallowes and Sorrell.